01-2021-Practical_Applications_of_Water_Hammer_Analysis_from_Hydraulic_Fracturin.txt
hits=14

p.1: 1 ===== SPE-204154-MS Practical Applications of Water Hammer Analysis from Hydraulic Fracturing Treatments Nguyen Dung, Cramer David, Danielson Tom, Snyder Jon, Roussel Nico, and Ouk Annie, ConocoPhillips Company Copyright 2021, Society of Petroleum Engineers This paper was prepared for presentation at the SPE Hydraulic Fracturing Technology Conference and Exhibition to be held virtually on 4 - 6 May 2021. The official proceedings were published online on 27 April 2021. This paper was selected for presentation by an SPE program committee following review of information contained in an abstract submitted by the author(s). Contents of the paper have not been reviewed by the Society of Petroleum Engineers and are subject to correction by the author(s). The material does not necessarily reflect any position of the Society of Petroleum Engineers, its officers, or members. Electronic reproduction, distribution, or storage of any part of this paper without the written consent of the Society of Petroleum Engineers is prohibited. Permission to reproduce in print is restricted to an abstract of not more than 300 words; illustrations may not be copied. The abstract must contain conspicuous ac...

p.8: 8 ===== 8 SPE-204154-MS Figure 9—Schematic of wave travel time for one water hammer cycle (period): closed inlet, closed outlet. Water Hammer Period Calculation. The following equation can be used to calculate the expected period for a water hammer signature. (3) Where B = Boundary Condition factor B = 4 for closed inlet and constant pressure outlet B = 2 for closed inlet and closed outlet MD = measured depth to flow exit (such as the perforation depth), ft or m C = fluid speed of sound in the wellbore, ft/s or m/s. Review of Prior Work on Water Hammer Analysis The use of water hammer signatures as a cost-effective, scalable diagnostic solution to characterize aspects of hydraulically induced fractures has been of great interest to the industry and academic communities. The properties of the signal can indicate the quality of the connection between the wellbore, the fracture network, and the reservoir. Holzhausen and Gooch (1985) first introduced the idea of using water-hammer signatures for fracture diagnostics, under the term impedance analysis. The method, referred to in later publications as Hydraulic Impedance Testing or HIT, relies on a lumped resistance-capacitance model to ...

p.10: 10 ===== 10 SPE-204154-MS efficiently use the treatment data from the completions database facilitated our learning in respect to the shut-in process and the subsequent water hammer signature. This section reviews the data considerations/requirements, the data analysis methods, and modeling. Data Collection Frequency Treatment pressure data is typically recorded at a frequency of 1 Hz (1 data point per second). A high frequency pressure gauge was used to determine if 1 Hz was an acceptable sampling frequency to adequately capture the characteristics of the water hammer that is induced by sharply reducing or terminating the treatment injection rate. Data Collection Frequency Study using High Frequency Pressure Transducer Data. Pressure data was recorded at a sampling frequency of 50 Hz, and the resulting data was edited to lower sampling frequencies to compare the resulting quality of the water hammer signature. A key assumption for this exercise is that the specifications (e.g., accuracy, resolution, frequency response) for the high frequency pressure transducer would be similar to the pressure transducer being provided by the service company for the standard one- second frequency ...

p.11: 11 ===== SPE-204154-MS 11 4. A sampling frequency of 1 Hz is adequate to characterize the water hammer period and decay rate. Higher sampling frequencies could be beneficial for performing more detailed analysis. Comparison of Pressure Transducers (50 Hz versus 1 Hz Data from Service Company). For the same operation noted in the prior section, two transducers recorded wellhead pressure. One was the 50 Hz pressure transducer (non-standard for our normal hydraulic fracturing treatments); the other was the service company pressure transducer which provides one-second frac data (standard for our normal hydraulic fracturing treatments). The two data sets are compared in Fig. 12. Figure 12—Comparison of high frequency versus one-hertz service company data. The following are observations on the comparison of the 50 Hz pressure transducer versus the 1 Hz service company transducer: 1. The top chart in Fig. 12 compares the 50 Hz pressure data set (blue series) against the 1 Hz service company pressure data (red series). A 3 second offset between the two data sets was identified. On the bottom chart in Fig. 12 , the 50 Hz pressure data was corrected with a time offset (yellow series) to line...

p.19: 19 ===== SPE-204154-MS 19 without delaying sequencing operations. The continuous recording of wellhead pressures can also facilitate data acquisition. c. Request service company to ensure that all injection rate channels accurately reflect what is being injected into the well. This may require a process to zero-out the injection rate during the shut-in period. d. Set instrumentation and data collection system requirements on time synchronization, reading accuracy, reading resolution, data collection frequency, and data transformations (instantaneous versus smoothed readings). Water Hammer Analysis The water hammer analysis consists of 4 parts: 1. Identification of the shut-in period. 2. Identification of water hammer peaks and troughs. 3. Calculation of water hammer period and the number of periods. 4. Calculation of water hammer decay rate (based on peak and trough pressure differences). See Fig. 23 for the parts of the water hammer nomenclature. Figure 23—Water hammer nomenclature The shut-in period is identified using the total injection rate. At the end of the treatment stage, the start of the shut-in period is based on a rate threshold considered to be zero rate. Due to potent...

p.21: 21 ===== SPE-204154-MS 21 Table 2—Water hammer calculations for the case depicted in Fig. 24. The total number of periods is the count of half periods divided by two. For this case, there are 12 half periods, so the number of periods is 6. To calculate the period, the differential time between the half periods are calculated. The average of the half period differential time is calculated. For this case, the average is 7.7 seconds for the half periods. The period is twice the half period average which is 15.4 seconds. With more half periods, the average period becomes more accurate as issues with properly picking the start and end times of the half periods get averaged out. The last step is to calculate the water hammer decay rate, as shown in Fig. 26. – The log of peak and trough differential pressure plotted versus shut-in time (seconds) is linear. The decay rate is represented by an exponential decay. – The decay rate for this case is −0.039. – The R2 value of 0.986 indicates a good correlation. In the development of the decay rate function, the exponential relationship was found to provide the best correlation. Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPEHFTC/​proceedings-pdf/​21HFTC/​21H...

p.25: 25 ===== SPE-204154-MS 25 In the event that there is some gas entrained in the liquid, the native speed of sound Co must be modified still further, as even a small amount of gas will have a very large impact on the speed of sound in the fluid. For a gas-liquid flow, the bulk modulus of the fluid is given by: (17) where HL and HG are the liquid and gas volume fractions, and C L and CG are the speed of sound in liquid and gas, respectively. The model has been tested against dozens of wells and hundreds of stages, with good fit to data, sometimes including small details in the pressure signature. Fig. 29 shows a comparison of the wellhead pressure during ramp-down of the slurry injection rate predicted by the water hammer model and measured in the field. Figure 29—Fit of water hammer model to field data This current developed model incorporates wellbore properties including perforations but does not incorporate the fracture network. The model provides the influence of the wellbore to the water hammer signature. Differences between the model and the actual field data can provide insight into the influence of the fracture network on the water hammer signature. Model Comparison to Actual...

p.27: 27 ===== SPE-204154-MS 27 – For Stage 11, the fit is good at the start; however, for this stage, the actual water hammer signature is dampening quicker than the model. It is uncertain whether the additional friction is due to fluid changes and/or the creation of a larger fracture network. Effects on Water Hammer Signature As the injection pumps reduce or terminate rate near the end of the treatment, a water hammer pressure signature will be created at the pump discharge. The nature of this signature depends on: • fluid speed of sound in casing • friction in the wellbore/fracture system • the boundary condition at the top and bottom of the well. • the nature of the step-down (i.e., step-down rate change and duration) The following water hammer model sensitivity studies were conducted to understand the effect of key parameters on the water hammer signature. Fluid properties In order from highest to lowest effect, the following fluid properties affect the water hammer signature. • fluid speed of sound in casing (affects the period). • turbulence suppression - friction reducers in the fluid affect the development of turbulent eddy currents which thereby reduce friction (affects the wat...

p.41: 41 ===== SPE-204154-MS 41 Case Study – Water Hammer Analysis in an Unconventional Reservoir Using the methods described in the sections above, water hammer data was analyzed for 8,831 fracturing stages in 395 wells in a North America unconventional reservoir. The analysis focused on the relationship of water hammer characteristics with the completion design and resulting well productivity. Water hammer data was not available on all stages of every well due to data quality issues. For production analysis, only the wells with water hammer data available on at least 50% of the stages were evaluated. A high-level summary of the findings from the analysis indicated the following. • The water hammer decay rate is most affected by near-wellbore fracture surface area. • A higher water hammer decay rate equates to contacting more near-wellbore fracture surface area. • A very low water hammer decay rate correlates with lower well productivity. • Low water hammer decay rates also correlate with long distance fracture-driven interactions (FDI), also known as frac hits. • The water hammer decay rate becomes more variable as the total treatment volume for a well increases. This study was limited...

p.42: 42 ===== 42 SPE-204154-MS 0.5 periods, as shown in Fig. 49. When compared to the range of values for number of water hammer periods, a difference of 0.5 periods is small but not negligible. Figure 49—Completions fluid type versus number of water hammer periods When evaluating water hammer data for all stages, there is not a clear trend between number of water hammer periods and stage depth. The primary reason for this is that friction within the hydraulic fracture system can have the dominant effect on friction and thus the water hammer decay rate during the post- treatment shut-in period. This is primarily the result of differences in surface area as demonstrated in the following hypothetical example. A wellbore consisting of 5-1/2 in. casing at a measured depth of 20,000 ft has an internal surface area of 24,450 ft2. The cumulative fracture surface area for a stage with 10 perforation clusters, each connected to one smooth-walled, planar fracture extending 75 ft radially from the wellbore is 176,700 ft2. In this example, the fracture surface area is more than seven times greater than the wellbore surface area. It is a conservative estimate of the potential difference. Hydraulic f...

p.43: 43 ===== SPE-204154-MS 43 Water Hammer Decay Rate as an Indication of Near-Wellbore Fracture Geometry. As postulated by Ciezobka et al. (2016), water hammer dampening or decay is affected by the degree of fracture connectivity with the wellbore. Being in contact with a greater number of fractures results in more rapid signal dampening or decay since friction is proportional to fracture surface area and complexity. This case is exemplified in comparing Fig. 50a. and Fig.50b. with Fig. 50c. and Fig. 50d. Being in contact with fewer fractures or a less complex fracture network results in less friction and slower signal dampening or decay. Figure 50—Proposed relationship of water hammer decay rate with contacted fracture area (Iriarte et al. 2017) Two relationships observed in analyzing the case study data support the above postulation. Wells with very low water hammer decay rates typically have poorer well productivity. Low water hammer decay rates also correlate with instances of long-distance FDI's, i.e., frac hits resulting from creating fewer and longer hydraulic fractures. A related observation was that the water hammer decay rate became more variable as the volume of fracturing ...

p.44: 44 ===== 44 SPE-204154-MS water hammer decay rates (red bar) typically had much longer-reaching FDI's. FDI's were determined by identifying pressure increases in passive offset wells that were synchronous with treatments being performed in the active analyzed well. The data in Fig. 52 is from 68 wells that had the same perforation cluster spacing, number of clusters and proppant volume for each treatment stage. The cutoff used for low decay rate was six or more water hammer periods per treatment stage and the cutoff for high decay rate was four or fewer periods per treatment stage. This data suggests that for a given treatment volume, treatments with low water hammer decay rates are associated with the creation of fewer, longer, less complex fractures, resulting in less cumulative fracture surface area. Figure 52—FDI's versus distance from the well being actively treated. Relationship Between Water Hammer and Well Productivity Wells that have very low water hammer decay rates commonly exhibit lower well productivity, underperforming by 10% to 20% as compared to wells with higher water hammer decay rates. The cutoff used for determining a very low decay rate depended on the size of ...

p.45: 45 ===== SPE-204154-MS 45 Figure 53—Well performance versus average number of water hammer periods for wells with 2600 lbs/ft proppant. Figure 54—Well performance versus average number of water hammer periods for wells with 3200 lbs/ft proppant. Conclusions • Setting data requirements with service companies and data aggregation companies will lead to obtaining high quality data for water hammer analysis. • The numerical water hammer model presented in the paper provides insight into physical processes associated with water hammer waveforms and is a vehicle for sensitivity testing of wellbore and treatment variables to evaluate the corresponding effect on water hammer signatures. • Using a consistent injection-rate step-down process at the end of fracturing treatments leads to more reliable results when comparing water hammer characteristics among multiple treatments and wells. • The water hammer decay rate is affected by pipe friction and friction in hydraulic fracture network. ◦ Continuing to pump during a water hammer, as is done during the injection rate step-down process at the end of treatments, increases the decay rate. ◦ During the shut-in period, there is no active pumping....

p.46: 46 ===== 46 SPE-204154-MS ◦ When fluid viscosity, friction reducer effectiveness, and pipe geometry are consistent among treatments being evaluated, pipe friction has a smaller impact on variations in the water hammer decay rate as compared to friction in the fracture network. • The water hammer decay rate appears to be mostly influenced by the fracture surface area near the wellbore. High decay rates are an indication of a large amount of near-wellbore fracture surface area and low decay rates indicate less near-wellbore fracture surface area. • For the wells analyzed in the unconventional reservoir case study data set, low water hammer decay rates correlated with relatively lower well productivity and long FDI's. • Optimal water hammer characteristics as related to well productivity may vary across fields and completion design types. Consequently, water hammer comparative analysis studies should be limited to specific completion styles, and geographic and geologic settings. Nomenclature Ak cross-sectional area in momentum grid at position k yk elevation in momentum grid at position k zk distance in momentum grid at position k distance in mass grid at position k ρk density in mome...