07-2023-A_Novel_MCMC-Based_Hydraulic_Fracture_Diagnostics_Approach_Using_Water_H.txt
hits=4

p.1: ABSTRACT: The water hammer signatures, which can be observed after pump shutdown at the end of a hydraulic fracture treatment, have proven to contain useful information about the geometry of generated hydraulic fractures. This paper presents a novel hydraulic fracture diagnostics approach using the water hammer data. A water hammer model that describes the pressure transient in hydraulically fractured horizontal well is established. In the model, a new multi -cluster hydraulic fracture boundary condition is derived by considering the perforation friction and leak -off in fractures. The method of characteristics is applied to efficiently solve the water hammer model. The water hammer signals can be effectively reproduced under different fracture characteristics. T he MCMC method is applied to construct the posterior statistics of fracture parameters (e.g., width, length, height). The propos ed approach is first verified by a series of synthetic models, and then applied to a real field case of a multi -stage hydraulic-fractured horizontal well in a shale gas reservoir to demonstrate its applicability and efficiency.

p.2: 2 ===== perforation friction and pressure-dependent fluid leak-off. A workflow was developed to interpret the water hammer data for fracture geometry characterization using an iterative ensemble smoother algorithm. In this paper, a water hammer model that describes the pressure transient in hydraulically fractured horizontal well is established. In this model, a new multi -cluster hydraulic fracture boundary condition is derived by considering the perforation friction and leak -off in fractures. The method of characteristics is ap plied to efficiently solve the water hammer model. The water hammer signals can be effectively simulated. Meanwhile, an interpretation workflow is developed based on the Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method, which can generate the posterior statistics of fracture parameters (e.g., width, length, height). Then a series of synthetic and field cases are used to testify the performance of the proposed approach in hydraulic fracture characterization using water hammer data. 2. MODEL AND METHODOLOGY 2.1. Water Hammer Model The water hammer model mainly consists of the wellbore pressure transient model, initial condition, and boundary condition. The pressure t...

p.3: Fig. 1. Schematic of the hydraulic fractures in a stage. 2.2. Numerical Solution The Method of Characteristics (MOC) is used to transform the partial differential equations, i.e., Eqs. (1) and (2), into ordinary differential equations along two characteristic lines:

p.3: tt PM i PM CCQ BB + −= + (16) where 11 tt P i iC H BQ−−=+ , 1 t PiB B R Q −=+ , 11 tt M i iC H BQ ++=− , 1 t MiB B R Q +=+ , aB gA= , 22 fxR gDA = , xt a = . Note that the pressure head and flow rate at the node 1 and n are calculated based on the boundary conditions of wellhead and hydraulic fracture. 2.3. Water Hammer Interpretation Method In order to interpret the hydraulic fracture geometry, a MCMC-based inversion method is used to automatically history match the water hammer data. Firstly, the posterior probability density distribution function of the interpretation parameters is expressed as