09-2024-Fracture_size_inversion_method_based_on_water_hammer_signal_for_shale_re.txt
hits=7

p.1: 1 ===== Fracture size inversion method based on water hammer signal for shale reservoir Bo Zeng 1,2, Shengjie Wei 3, Yuliang Su 1*, Junchuan Gui 2, Jiangrong Feng 2, Yintong Guo 4 and Peihong Lyu 3 1School of Petroleum Engineering, China University of Petroleum, Qingdao, Shandong, China, 2Shale Gas Research Institute, PetroChina Southwest Oil and Gas Field Company, Chengdu, Sichuan, China, 3College of Petroleum Engineering, China University of Petroleum-Beijing, Beijing, China, 4Institute of Rock and Soil Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Wuhan, Hubei, China Hydraulic fracturs size inversion plays an important role on evaluating hydraulic fracturing ef ﬁciency. Fracture size can be calculated by microseism events or all the pressure data generated by hydraulic fracturing stimulations. These methods are time-consuming. However, the sudden shutoff of pumping can induce a special data known as the water hammer signal. The size of this data is much fewer than others so using it to calculate fracture size is ef ﬁcient. This study proposes a method of using water hammer signal to work out the hydraulic fracture size. The numerical simulation model is proposed based on the tra...

p.2: 2 ===== form an effective fracture network, which decreases economic costs and enhances production recovery ( Guo et al., 2022 ; Peng-Fei et al., 2023). S i n c et h eh y d r a u l i cf r a c t u r es i z ec a n n o tb ed i r e c t l yo b s e r v e d , many methods for calculating hyd raulic fracture size have been proposed to evaluate the quality of hydraulic fracture. The common calculation methods are: G-function analysis, AVO (Amplitude Variation with Offse t) inversion, thermal neutron detection technology and ﬁeld direct logging or microseismic detection. Since the G-functi on method was proposed in 1987, the research on fracture size calculation methods by G-function had been widely studied ( Castillo, 1987 ; Yuan et al., 2016 ; Recep et al., 2021 ; Tu et al., 2022 ; Jatykov and Bimuratkyzy, 2022 ). However, the traditional G-function model is dif ﬁcult to estimate the shape of the multi-fracture network in each fracturing stage. In the latest study ( Hou et al., 2022 ), a multi-fracture geometry c a l c u l a t i o nm o d e lb a s e do nt h eG -function graph of the pressure drop data after fracturing was prop osed. It can obtain the fracture length and width by considering...

p.8: 8 ===== 3 Fracture size inversion method based on water hammer signal 3.1 Water hammer phenomenon The pump or valve is closed at the end of hydraulic fracturing stimulation, inducing a pressure wave because of theﬂuid ﬂow inertia. T h i sp h e n o m e n o ni sk n o w na st h ew a t e rh a m m e rp h e n o m e n o n .T h i s pressure wave transports in the wellhole and is reﬂected when it reaches at the end of wellhole. During this process, the hydraulic fracture affects the pressure wave transport behavior, and pressure signal with some oscillations can be received at the wellhead. The characteristics of pressure signal (such as amplitude , frequency) dynamically change with time due toﬂuid ﬂow friction andﬂowing into fractures, as shown in Figure 7 . By simulating the water hammer pressure signal, the characteristics of the fracture can be inverted. 3.2 Numerical simulation model of water hammer phenomenon Figure 8 shows the geometry model of wellbore-fracture structure. When the fracturing stimulation is stopped instantaneously, the pressure wave propagates through the fracturing ﬂuid, re ﬂects at the end of the wellbore, and is superimposed with other pressure waves. The overall...

p.12: 12 ===== The impact of R on water hammer signal at wellhead is shown in Figure 9 . It is clearly shown that R affects the amplitude of the simulated water hammer signal. The amplitude of water hammer signal decreases with the R value. When the R increases from 10 to 50, the initial amplitude of water hammer signal decreases from 5 to 3 MPa. After several periods of vibration, the amplitude also decreases. When the R increases from 10 to 50, the following amplitude of water hammer signal decreases from 3t o1 M P a . The impact of C on water hammer signal at wellhead is shown in Figure 10 . It is clearly shown that C affects the mean value of the simulated water hammer signal. The mean value of water hammer signal decreases with the C value. When the C increases from 0.2 to 1, the mean value of water hammer signal decreases from 74 to 69 MPa. Through these two ﬁgures, it is can be seen that water hammer signal is dependent with those parameters, so it is possible that the real water hammer signal could be matched by carefully selecting those parameters ’ values. 3.4 Calculation procedure After the available parameters are found out through matching water hammer signal, the fracture s...

p.13: 13 ===== error increases to 1.64% –3.76%, as shown in Figures 11f –J. The reasons for this phenomenon are as follows. (1) The friction model in the numerical simulation model of the water hammer ( f in Eq. 5) may not be suitable for the actual friction behavior of fracturing ﬂuid. When the amplitude of the water hammer signal is less than 1.5 MPa, it indicates that the friction is small, so the error is few. (2) The method of using three parameters,R, C,a n dI to represent the effect of fractures on water hammer signals may not be suitable for horizontal wells with quite complex fracture network. The fracture morphology of some horizontal wells has the main fracture and the secondary fractures which are more complex than the normal bi- wing fracture morphology. The impact of such complex fracture on water hammer signal may be hard to be represented by the simple three parameters. If the relationship between these three parameters FIGURE 12 Comparison of water hammer inversion results and ﬁnite element inversion results. (A) comparison result of Well 2; (B) comparion result of Well 4; (C) comparison result of Well 6. Frontiers in Energy Research frontiersin.org13 Zeng et al. 10.3389...

p.14: 14 ===== a n df r a c t u r es i z eo rf r a c t u r en e t w o r ki sk n o w n ,t h i sm e t h o dc a nb e used to evaluate more information of fracture morphology. The corresponding studies are required in the further. 4.2 Inversion results of fracture size After the reasonable values of R, C, and I are obtained, substituting them into Eqs 10–12 can get fracture size. The iteration process is implemented using EXCEL software, with 200 iteration steps. The relevant parameters are shown in Table 4 . The fracture length obtained by the water hammer inversion method is compared with that simulated by hydraulic fracturing ﬁnite element software. The comparison results for the Well 2, Well 4 and Well 6 are shown in Figures 12A–C, respectively. According to the comparison with the ﬁnite element results, the overall errors of this new method is 6.28%. These few errors magnitude indicate that this new method is quite accurate. This method of using w a t e rh a m m e rs i g n a lt oc a l c u l a t ef racture size is much simpler than the one of ﬁnite element method, therefore, this new method has more efﬁciency and can give timely feedback to engineers and ensures quick modiﬁcation of frac...

p.15: 15 ===== Conference and Exhibition, Houston, Texas, USA, September 2015. doi:10.2118/ 174866-MS Castillo, J. L. (1987). “Modiﬁed fracture pressure decline analysis including pressure- dependent leakoff, ” in Paper presented at the SPE/DOE Joint Symposium on Low Permeability Reservoirs, Denver, Colorado, USA, May, 1987. doi:10.2118/16417-MS Chaudhury, H. M. (1987). Applied hydraulic transients . New York, NY, USA: Van Nostrand Reinhold Company. Chen, Z. (2005). Finite element methods and their applications . Heidelberg, Germany: Springer-Verlag. doi:10.1007/3-540-28078-2 Chen, Z., Huan, G., and Ma, Y. (2006). Computational methods for multiphase ﬂows in porous media. Comput. Sci. Eng. Ser. 2. doi:10.1137/1.9780898718942 Churchill, S. W. (1997). Friction factor equation spans all ﬂuid-ﬂow regimes. Chem. Eng. 84 (24), 91 –92. Davis, J., Warpinski, N. R., Davis, E. J., Grif ﬁn, L. G., and Malone, S. (2008). “Joint inversion of downhole tiltmeter and microseismic data and its application to hydraulic fracture mapping in tight gas sand formation, ” in Paper presented at the The 42nd U.S. Rock Mechanics Symposium (USRMS), San Francisco, California, June 2008. Gabriel, C., Sonja, M., Thier...