11-2025-A_Novel_Comprehensive_Water_Hammer_Pressure_Model_for_Fracture_Geometry_.txt
hits=6

p.1: 1 ===== September 2025 SPE Journal5350 A Novel Comprehensive Water Hammer Pressure Model for Fracture Geometry Evaluation Shuangshuang Sun1, Yongming He1*, Yanchao Li2, Lijun Liu1, Yisheng Liu1, Longqing Zou2, and Huan Ma3 1College of Energy, Chengdu University of Technology, Chengdu, China 2Shale Gas Exploration and Development Department, CNPC Chuanqing Drilling Engineering Co., Ltd., Chengdu, China 3Oil and Gas Technology Research Institute of Petrochina, Changqing Oilfield Company, Xi’ an, China Summary Hydraulic fracturing is a critical technology in reservoir modification design. Post- fracturing fracture geometry characterization is of essential importance for the design and optimization of hydraulic fracturing treatments. In recent years, fracture geometry evaluation methods based on water hammer pressure analysis have gained significant attention due to their cost- effectiveness and operational sim- plicity. However, existing water hammer models based on equivalent circuit theory exhibit limited physical interpretability between mod- el parameters and fracture geometry characteristics. In this study, we propose a novel water hammer modeling approach with enhanced physical ...

p.2: 2 ===== September 2025 SPE Journal 5351 leakoff to evaluate fracture- related parameters. Dung et al. (2021) proposed a hydrodynamics- based water hammer response simulator to qualitatively analyze the relationship between water hammer characteristics and fracture characteristics and well productivity. Qiu et al. (2022) used a transient flow model to describe the fluctuation of water hammer pressure and analyzed the effect of fracture on the response characteristics of water hammer signals from multiple perspectives, such as the time, frequency, and quefrency domain. Hu et al. (2022) proposed a new model for calculating the geometry of multiple fractures by considering the stress interference between fractures, thereby evaluating the geometrical characteristics of multiple fractures based on the water hammer signals. These studies have advanced the development and application of water hammer theory. Investigations as detailed above explicitly confirm that water hammer pressure analysis can effectively identify the geometric parameters of hydraulic fractures. However, most of the above models characterize the bottomhole boundary between the wellbore and fractures as a series- connec...

p.11: 11 ===== September 2025 SPE Journal5360 Effects of Fracture Parameters. Effect of Fracture Half-Length. Based on the basic data of Well B, to analyze the influence of fracture half- length on the water hammer pressure curve, fracture half- lengths of 80 m, 140 m, 200 m, and 260 m were designed and substituted into the model of this study to calculate the corresponding water hammer pressure curves, as shown in Fig. 7. From Fig. 7, it is observed that the fracture half- length has a significant impact on the decay rate of the water hammer pressure curve; as the fracture half- length increases, the curve decays more rapidly. The increase in fracture half- length not only enlarges the fluid loss area but also extends the wave propagation path, resulting in greater frictional resistance and ultimately accelerating energy dissipation. Fig. 7—Water hammer pressure curves for different fracture half- lengths. Effect of Fracture Height. Taking fracture heights of 10 m, 20 m, 30 m, and 40 m, we calculate the water hammer pressure curves under different fracture heights and analyze their influence on the water hammer pressure curves. Fig. 8 presents the calculation results of water hammer pre...

p.14: 14 ===== September 2025 SPE Journal 5363 Fig. 12—Water hammer pressure curves for different wellbore along- track friction coefficients. Effect of Friction Coefficient along the Wellbore. The wellbore friction coefficient is closely related to the resistance of fluid flow along the wellbore and significantly influences the water hammer pressure. To analyze the impact of the wellbore along- travel friction coeffi- cient on water hammer pressure, simulations are conducted with wellbore along- travel friction coefficients of 0.02, 0.05, and 0.08, and the results are depicted in Fig. 12. From Fig. 12, it is evident that along- travel friction affects the decay rate of the water hammer pressure oscillation amplitude. The larger the along- travel friction coefficient, the greater the energy loss during pressure propagation, and the faster the decay of the pressure oscillation amplitude. Field Case Analysis. Using our model with wellbore and formation parameters from a Sichuan Basin shale gas horizontal well (see Table 3 for complete parameters), we simulated water hammer pressure and matched field- measured data to evaluate fracture geometry. Parameters Well B- 1 Well B- 2 Well B- 3 Well...

p.15: 15 ===== September 2025 SPE Journal5364 Discussion. In this study, we propose a novel water hammer modeling approach. First, accounting for fluid compressibility effects, we derive the governing equations for water hammer phenomena, including both the motion equation and continuity equation. Second, based on the mass balance principle and considering perforation friction and fluid filtration effects, boundary constraints for the bottomhole fracture are established. Finally, a new water hammer pressure calculation model is developed by integrating fluid compressibility, tubing friction, perforation friction, and fluid filtration effects within the hydraulic fracture, thereby enabling fracture geometry evaluation. In contrast to equivalent- circuit- based water hammer models, our approach establishes wellbore- fracture boundary conditions through perforation friction and fracture fluid mass conservation, providing clearer physical significance and overcoming the inherent limitation where circuit model parameters lack direct correspondence with fracture geometry. Moreover, in practical water hammer analysis, the wave speed is often difficult to determine accurately. The proposed model...

p.17: 17 ===== September 2025 SPE Journal5366 He, H., Zou, L., Li, Y . et al. 2024. Simulation Method and Feature Analysis of Shutdown Pressure Evolution During Multi- Cluster Fracturing Stimulation. Energy 121 (1): 111–123. https://doi.org/10.32604/ee.2023.041010. Holzhausen, G. R. and Gooch, R. P. 1985. Impedance of Hydraulic Fractures: Its Measurement and Use for Estimating Fracture Closure Pressure and Dimensions. Paper presented at the SPE/DOE Low Permeability Gas Reservoirs Symposium, Denver, Colorado, USA, 19−22 May. https://doi.org/10. 2118/13892-MS. Howard, G. and Fast, C. R. 1957. Optimum Fluid Characteristics for Fracture Extension. Drill Prod Practice 24: 261–270. Hu, X., Luo, Y ., Zhou, F. et al. 2022. Evaluation of Multi- Fractures Geometry Based on Water Hammer Signals: A New Comprehensive Model and Field Application. J Hydrol 612: 128240. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2022.128240. Hwang, J., Szabian, M. J., and Sharma, M. 2017. Hydraulic Fracture Diagnostics and Stress Interference Analysis by Water Hammer Signatures in Multi- Stage Pumping Data. Paper presented at the SPE/AAPG/SEG Unconventional Resources Technology Conference, Austin, Texas, USA, 24−26 July. https:/...