16-2026-Real-Time_Diagnostics_of_Hydraulic_Fracture_Propagation_Using_Continuous.txt
hits=23

p.1: 1 ===== 2026 SPE Journal 1 Real- Time Diagnostics of Hydraulic Fracture Propagation Using Continuous Wavelet Transform of Transient Pressure Fluctuation Jialin Zhang1,2, Mao Sheng1,2* , Yulong Jiang 1,2, Shizhong Cheng3, Jie Li4, Xiaodong He4, and Shouceng Tian1,2 1State Key Laboratory of Deep Geothermal Resources, China University of Petroleum (Beijing), Beijing, China 2Research Center for Intelligent Drilling & Completion Technology and Equipment, China University of Petroleum (Beijing), Beijing, China 3China Coal Technology and Industry Group Co. Ltd., Beijing, China 4PetroChina Xinjiang Oilfield Company, Karamay, Xinjiang, China Summary Hydraulic fracturing diagnostics are essential for the efficient stimulation of unconventional reservoirs. Treating pressure is an accessible field signal and provides a low- cost and nonintrusive basis for characterizing hydraulic fracture propagation. However, conventional time- domain analysis often fails to capture transient fluctuations associated with fracture propagation because of the interference from wellbore resonance, operational adjustments, and background noise. More valuable pressure fluctuation distributes across the various freq...

p.2: 2 ===== 2026 SPE Journal2 pressure fluctuations superimposed on the global pressure trend. Transient pressure fluctuations have also been observed in laboratory true- triaxial hydraulic fracturing tests. Bian et al. (2016) related fluctuation frequency and amplitude on the treatment curve to fracture complexity and far- field fracture geometry. Abdelaziz and Grasselli (2024) observed the difference in pressure fluctuation between tensile and shear fractures, which provided key physical evidence for the characteristics of pressure fluctuation. Tensile fracture exhibits a sharp pressure drop with quick recovery, while shear fracture shows a slower pressure recovery. These observations indicate that pressure fluc- tuations are informative indicators of complex fracture evolution. Owing to formation heterogeneity and varying fracture types, such fluctuations appear not as continuous water- hammer oscillations, but as frequency- varying transient responses. Because fracture- induced pressure fluctuations are nonstationary and frequency- varying, time- domain analysis alone is often insuffi- cient. Wavelet transform provides localized resolution in both time and frequency, enabling effec...

p.3: 3 ===== 2026 SPE Journal 3 features, a rule- based fuzzy inference system is constructed to classify fracture propagation behaviors into four distinct patterns: primary fracture growth, complex fracture development, discontinuities intersection, and fracture interruption. Fig. 2 summarizes the overall workflow. Fig. 2—Transient- pressure analysis workflow for diagnosing fracture propagation patterns. FIS = fuzzy inference system. Extraction of Transient Pressure Fluctuations Using CWT. Transient pressure fluctuations are often subtle and short- lived, and are easily obscured in raw time- domain pressure records by operational adjustments, wellbore resonance, and background noise. Time- frequency analysis is therefore required to separate fracture- induced pressure fluctuations from interference. As a mathematical microscope for transient- signal detection, CWT enables adaptive time- frequency resolution and has been widely applied in mechanical fault diagnosis (Nikolaou and Antoniadis 2002; Yan et al. 2014). By performing scale and translation operations on a selected mother wavelet, CWT decomposes 1D signal into multiple frequency components, allowing the detailed examination of f...

p.3: (1) where f /NUL t /SOH is the time- series signal, and ' is the mother wavelet that becomes '/ETX when employing a complex wavelet. The scale param- eter a controls the frequency of the wavelet by compressing or stretching the mother wavelet. A smaller scale corresponds to a higher frequency, whereas a larger scale corresponds to a lower frequency. The location parameter b determines the time localization of the wavelet. The wavelet coefficients C /NUL a, b /SOH are obtained through the convolution of the signal with the wavelet across various scales and locations, serving as an indicator of their local similarity. The complex Morlet wavelet provides smooth energy continuity and high- frequency resolution due to its Gaussian- window form. Its complex representation enables simultaneous extraction of amplitude and phase, making it well suited for identifying transient high- frequency responses associated with fracture behavior. Practical applications show that the complex Morlet wavelet with a bandwidth of 1.5 and a center frequency of 1 Hz is effective for identifying fracture propa- gation and closure events, as well as analyzing water- hammer energy attenuation under a 1- Hz sam...

p.4: (3) where Ts is the sampling period (seconds), and fa is the frequency corresponding to scale a . A total of 256 scales are established to enhance the resolution in the high- frequency components while maintaining adequate coverage of the low- frequency components. Signal energy is a key attribute that characterizes the strength and variation of the signal (Unal et al. 2019a). CWT can effectively decompose and preserve the energy distribution of pressure fluctuation across different frequency scales, where the energy is calculated from the squared modulus of the wavelet coefficients. E /NUL a, b /SOH = ˇˇC /NUL a, b /SOHˇ ˇ 2 . (4) Wavelet coherence provides a powerful time- frequency tool for quantifying the coupling influence of external signals on the target signal. Based on CWT, it measures localized correlation and phase consistency between two time series and is particularly effective for analyzing nonstationary signals (Peng et al. 2020). The wavelet coherence analysis consists of three main steps. First, CWT is applied separately to the treating pressures and slurry rates to obtain their time- frequency energy spectrum Ex /NUL a, b /SOH and Ey /NUL a, b /SOH

p.4: are the wavelet coefficients of the pressure and rate signals across various scales and locations, and /ETX denotes the complex conjugate. To reduce the influence of random noises, Gaussian smoothing is applied to both the individual and cross spectra. Finally, the wavelet coherence coefficient is calculated as

p.4: (7) where t is the time (seconds), and /ESC is the standard deviation that controls the width of the Gaussian kernel and the degree of smoothing. The wavelet coherence coefficients vary within the interval [0, 1], where a value close to 1 indicates a strong correlation. Quantification of Transient Pressure Fluctuation Features. Building on the time- frequency decomposition, this section converts the CWT- resolved transient fluctuations into quantitative metrics. During fracture propagation, intermittent stress release and reaccumulation generate transient pressure- drop and pressure- recovery fluctuations superimposed on the global pressure trend. Unlike continuous sinusoidal oscillations, these transient fluctuations exhibit asymmetric half- cycles and corresponding frequency variation, exciting broadband impulsive responses in the time- frequency domain characterized by rapid low- to- high frequency energy transfer and nonuniform energy distribution across frequencies. On this basis, two quantitative features—pressure fluctuation energy and attenuation coefficient—are defined to characterize the stress release and reaccumulation intrinsic to hydraulic fractures propagation. The p...

p.5: 5 ===== 2026 SPE Journal 5 of pressure fluctuation energy. In contrast, the global threshold provides a stable baseline for cross- comparison among different lithologies and reservoirs, ensuring consistent peak- discrimination criteria to suppress background noise. Specifically, the global threshold baseline ıglobal can be statistically determined as the minimum level of the pressure energy distribution across different lithologies and formations. The minimum level is set to the order of 25% quantile according to statistical characteristics. As a result, the peak energy detection algo- rithm identifies local maxima of the pressure fluctuation energy that satisfy the following conditions.

p.5: (10) A pressure- fluctuation filter is then applied to remove false energy peaks. For each detected peak energy, the presence of a negative pres- sure trough is checked within a ±5- second window. If no negative trough is found, the peak is treated as a pressure discontinuity incon- sistent with the fracture- induced fluctuation, and the corresponding pressure energy is set to zero. This ensures that only reliable pressure energy peaks are retained to represent actual fracture propagation events. In addition, the pressure fluctuation attenuation coefficient is defined from the pressure energy distribution contrast between high- and low- frequency sub- bands. To compress the amplitude difference in pressure energy and enhance the contrast of different frequency com- ponents, the pressure time- frequency energy spectrum is logarithmically transformed: Elog /NUL a, b /SOH = log2 /STX E /NUL a, b /SOH/ETX . (11) The log- transformed pressure energy within each sub- band is then calculated using Eq. 8, yielding two time series of the mean pressure energy denoted as X = /STX x1, x2, /SOH/SOH/SOH, xn /ETX and Y = /STX y1, y2, /SOH/SOH/SOH, yn /ETX

p.5: . When the evolution trends of pressure energy between sub- bands begin to diverge, it indicates the occurrence of pressure fluctuation attenuation, with a stronger transfer of pressure energy toward the low- frequency band. A 30- second sampling window with a 5- second step size is applied to traverse the entire time series, and the Pearson correlation coefficient between X and Y is calculated within each sampling window:

p.5: (12) where rXY is the Pearson correlation coefficient, the value range of which is [−1, 1], n is the total length of the sampling window (seconds), xi and yi are the values of mean normalized pressure energy in the high- and low- frequency bands, and Nx and Ny are their respective aver- ages. Furthermore, the correlation coefficients of each sampling window are linearly interpolated to match the original time- series length. The interpolated correlation coefficient Ori XY is then integrated with the absolute difference in pressure energy between the two series to quantify the pressure fluctuation attenuation coefficient:

p.6: 6 ===== 2026 SPE Journal6 For real- time diagnosis, a rule- based fuzzy classification algorithm is established using pressure fluctuation energy Ei and attenuation coefficient Di XY as key indicators. The 1- Hz time series is segmented into nonoverlapping 5- second windows, which approximately encompass the typical 2–5 seconds duration of individual transient pressure fluctuations. Within each window, the median and median absolute deviation (MAD) are calculated for both Ei and Di XY to serve as robust feature inputs:

p.6: (15) where OE and OD are the median within the analysis window, and k is the MAD multiplier controlling outlier sensitivity; it may be adjusted according to the temporal sparsity of transient pressure fluctuations, with sparser and more temporally concentrated responses generally favoring a smaller k . To ensure the consistency and significance of fracture- induced pressure fluctuation features under specific litholog- ical and reservoir conditions, the 25th- percentile levels of the pressure energy and attenuation coefficient distributions are adopted as global thresholds. If the window mean does not exceed the corresponding threshold, the outlier ratio is set to zero to suppress background noise. The fuzzy system uses the ratios of pressure- energy and attenuation- coefficient outliers ( RE and RD ) as inputs, each divided into two LOW and HIGH by trapezoidal membership functions for computational efficiency and direct visualization of threshold- based deci- sion regions in engineering diagnostics (Artun and Kulga 2020). The fuzzy inference result is discretized into four dominant fracture propagation patterns according to the rules listed in Table 1. Centroid defuzzification con...

p.7: 7 ===== 2026 SPE Journal 7 fracture development,” and (2) LOW RE and HIGH RD correspond to “Discontinuities intersection.” Each of them represents the possible fracture pattern implied by the current inputs. Using the minimum operator, the corresponding candidate output fuzzy sets are generated, shown by the shaded hatched regions in Fig. 4. These outputs are then aggregated into the fuzzy inference result by the gray region in the lower- right panel. Centroid defuzzification finally gives an output value of 3.5, corresponding to the final classification of “Complex fracture development.” Applying the fuzzy inference system to each analysis window yields a sequence of fracture- pattern labels. Each 5- second window characterizes the local tendency of hydraulic energy allocation within the wellbore/formation system. For engineering interpretation, these labels are more meaningfully aggregated over a longer interval, and the proportion of each category can be treated as an empirical indicator of the relative tendency of different fracture- propagation behaviors. Results Real-Time Diagnostics of Fracture Propagation Patterns. Pressure Time-Frequency Energy Spectrum Based on CWT. First...

p.8: is the average value of the mean coherence coefficients at all moments, and S is the standard deviation of the mean coherence coefficients at all moments. As shown in Fig. 6b, a threshold of Z >2 is applied to identify instants of local significant coherence. A rate- coupled interval is then defined as a ˙ 5- second window surrounding each identified instant. Accordingly, the pressure energy within these intervals is corrected to zero to mitigate local rate effects. Diagnostic Sub-Band Selection and Feature Quantification. Using wavelet coherence analysis, the 0.3–0.5- Hz range is identified as the diagnostic band for fracture- induced transient pressure fluctuations. To further define physically meaningful sub- bands within this range, reported 3D finite- discrete element method simulation results are analyzed (Cheng et al. 2026). Spearman rank correlation (de Winter et al. 2016) between sub- band pressure energy within 0–0.5 Hz and incremental fracture volume increases markedly above 0.3 Hz (Fig. 7b). This indicates reduced low- frequency trend interference and stronger temporal localization of broadband impulsive responses, making the 0.3–0.5- Hz band more representative of frac...

p.9: 9 ===== 2026 SPE Journal 9 Classification Results of Fracture Propagation Patterns. Rule- based fuzzy inference is used to classify fracture propagation patterns into four categories based on these two features. Their global thresholds are statistically determined for different lithologies and reservoirs using the field data sets summarized in Table 2. As shown in Fig. 9, both pressure fluctuation energy and attenuation coefficient in shale reservoirs are approximately one order of magnitude higher than those in sandstone reservoirs, mainly because shale is more brittle and commonly contains bedding discontinuities that promote stronger stress release and more tortuous fracture propagation (Hou et al. 2016; Li et al. 2023). Specifically, the global thresholds for shale reservoirs are set to 1×10 −5 for pressure energy and 0.1 for the attenuation coefficient. Data Source Number of Wells and Stages Sample Size Formation Coverage Ordos Basin 4 wells/85 stages 777,703 Mud shale with thin, silty, fine sandstone interbeds Ordos Basin 7 wells/64 stages 467,836 Medium- grained sandstone Table 2—Statistical characterization of pressure- derived features in shale and sandstone reservoirs. Us...

p.10: 10 ===== 2026 SPE Journal10 Supporting Evidence from Independent Measurements. Supporting Evidence from Microseismic Observations. The MIP- 3H well from the Marcellus Shale Energy and Environment Laboratory is selected as Case 1 (Carr et al. 2019). Effective pumping data from 21 stages are analyzed and compared with corresponding microseismic observations. The 1- Hz treating- pressure signal is processed by CWT using the complex Morlet wavelet and 256 linearly discretized frequency scales. Within the 0.3–0.5- Hz diagnostic band, pressure fluctuation energy and attenuation coefficient are calculated, and fracture propagation patterns are classified by the rule- based fuzzy inference system with 5- second windows. Pressure- derived metrics include pressure fluctuation events (as proxies for prominent fracture events), cumulative pressure fluctuation energy, cumulative attenuation coefficient, and fracture- pattern labels, with the temporal proportion of “Complex fracture development” calculated using a 60- second sliding window with a 5- second step. Microseismic metrics include cumulative seismic moment and b- value. Seismic moment scales with the source deformation of individual ev...

p.11: 11 ===== 2026 SPE Journal 11 responses. Time windows with elevated b- values moderately correspond to higher proportions of the “Complex fracture development” pattern inferred from pressure analysis, providing moderate support for the interpretation that more distributed and branched fracture paths can induce jointly elevated pressure fluctuation energy and attenuation. Some local discrepancies remain (e.g., during 3:10–3:25), reflecting differences in temporal resolutions and sensing mechanisms of microseismic and pressure measurements. Nevertheless, these moderate temporal associations support the interpretation that the target- band transient pressure fluctuations are more likely induced by fracture stress- state changes than by random perturbations. To further statistically substantiate this relationship, the analysis is extended to 21 fracturing stages from Case 1 (Fig. 12). Spearman rank correlation shows that the count of microseismic events and cumulative seismic moment are positively correlated with the number of identified pressure fluctuation events and cumulative pressure fluctuation energy, respectively. The overall b- value is positively cor - related with cumulative ...

p.13: 13 ===== 2026 SPE Journal 13 Effect of the Sampling Frequency. Standard 1- Hz field acquisition enables efficient CWT- based fracture propagation identification. Although higher sampling rates help capture broadband impulsive responses and improve the timing accuracy of fracture- event localization, their practical benefit is limited by wellbore resonance, which may dominate high- frequency pressure components and constrain the observable bandwidth of fracture- induced impulses. Fig. 17 shows the time- frequency energy spectrum obtained from 10- Hz pressure data. The impulse bandwidth extends to approxi- mately 1 Hz but is strongly masked by pronounced wellbore characteristic frequencies at higher frequencies, indicating that the coupled wellbore/fracture system becomes resonance- dominated beyond this range. Thus, increasing the sampling rate does not necessarily expand the usable diagnostic bandwidth. Nevertheless, high- rate acquisition remains advantageous because antialias filtering before downsampling suppresses resonant clutter and prevents its aliasing into the diagnostic band. As shown in Fig. 18, direct 1- Hz acquisition suffers from persistent contamination of wellbore r...

p.15: 15 ===== 2026 SPE Journal 15 et al. 2025). Compared with independent monitoring techniques, pressure signals provide a physically grounded and broadly applicable diagnostic source. In practice, the method relies only on routinely recorded treatment data, with wellhead pressure and slurry rate as the minimum inputs, requiring no additional monitoring cost. Independent monitoring data sets are used only as supporting benchmarks rather than deployment prerequisites. By updating fracture- pattern information every few seconds, the method can support real- time treatment optimization. For example, persistently weak “Complex fracture development” accompanied by insufficient pressure energy may indicate poor fracture- fluid efficiency or risks such as interstage communication and screen out, thereby motivating timely adjust- ments of diversion timing or pumping schedule. Limitations. Despite these advantages, the proposed method should be regarded as a realistic but simplified system- scale classification of hydraulic- energy allocation rather than a geometric reconstruction of fracture propagation because pressure signals inherently lack spatial information. As a single- point response o...

p.16: 16 ===== 2026 SPE Journal16 enhancing pressure energy over a finite time interval. Meanwhile, relatively stronger high- frequency attenuation shifts and concentrates this sustained elevated energy near 0.35−0.4 Hz, thereby deriving a narrow- band energy response from the broadband impulsive response. This suggests that different fracture behaviors may contain richer diagnostic details in the time- frequency spectrum than can be captured by band- level statistical features alone. In the current workflow, pressure fluctuation energy and attenuation quantify the stress state during fracture propagation, and fuzzy inference provides an interpretable engineering- oriented classifier in data- scarce scenarios. The fuzzy inference results can further serve as preliminary labels for future data- driven interpretation when independent fracture monitoring is insufficient. However, the workflow summarizes each diagnostic band into averaged statistical features and may underutilize fine- scale spectral details at individual frequencies. Future work could enrich the data set and integrate computer- vision learning with time- frequency spectrum to link localized broadband impulses and prolonged ...

p.17: 17 ===== 2026 SPE Journal 17 Conclusions For this paper, we developed a real- time diagnostic method utilizing CWT to extract rate- corrected transient pressure fluctuations associ- ated with hydraulic fracture propagation, enabling the dynamic classification of fracture propagation patterns, including primary fracture growth, complex fracture development, discontinuities intersection, and fracture interruption. The proposed method is supported by independent measurements from microseismic monitoring, distributed fiber- optic measurements, and stage- level tracer production data. It can be concluded that: 1. CWT effectively extracts transient pressure fluctuations intrinsic from the stress release and accumulation of hydraulic fracture propa- gation, which manifest as broadband impulses in the time- frequency domain. Assisted by wavelet coherence analysis to exclude rate- coupled responses, the 0.3–0.5- Hz frequency components are identified as the optimal diagnostic window for standard 1- Hz sampling data. 2. Pressure fluctuation energy in the 0.4–0.5- Hz sub- band serves as a surrogate for instantaneous stress release of fracture opening and reflects the efficiency with which the...

p.18: 18 ===== 2026 SPE Journal18 Hu, S. M., Sheng, M., Liu, B. B. et al. 2025. Mechanism- Guided Data- Driven Model for Optimized Completion Design. Pet Sci 22 (12): 5068–5083. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.petsci.2025.09.031. Li, D., Han, M., and Zhu, Q. 2023. Evaluation of Rock Brittleness Index under Dynamic Load. App Sci 13 (8): 4698. https://doi.org/10.3390/app13084698. Li, X., Ji, H., Wang, H. et al. 2025. Controlling Factors of Hydraulic Fractures Based on a Post- Fracturing Cored Well in Glutenite Reservoirs: A Case Study from Mahu Depression, Junggar Basin. SPE J. 30 (3): 1037–1051. https://doi.org/10.2118/223958-PA. Li, S., Sheng, M., Hao, X. et al. 2026. In- Situ SEM- DIC Imaging on Fracture Process Zone Evaluation of Laminated Shale Rock Fracturing. Theor Appl Fract Mech 141: 105334. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tafmec.2025.105334. Li, G., Song, X., Tian, S. et al. 2022a. Intelligent Drilling and Completion: A Review. Eng 18: 33–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eng.2022.07.014. Li, M.-H., Zhou, F.-J., Wang, B. et al. 2022b. Numerical Simulation on the Multiple Planar Fracture Propagation with Perforation Plugging in Horizontal Wells. Pet Sci 19 (5): 2253–2267. https://doi.org/10.1016/...