Leak_Detection_and_Topology_Identification_in_Pipelines_Using_Fluid_Transients_a.txt
hits=5

p.1: 1 ===== Leak Detection and Topology Identification in Pipelines Using Fluid Transients and Artificial Neural Networks Jessica Bohorquez 1; Bradley Alexander 2; Angus R. Simpson, M.ASCE 3; and Martin F. Lambert, M.ASCE 4 Abstract: Condition assessment of water pipelines using fluid transient waves is a noninvasive technique that has been investigated for the past 25 years. Approaches to identify different anomalies and to identify elements of the topology of a pipeline have been proposed but often require detailed modeling and knowledge of the system. On the other hand, artificial neural networks (ANN) have become a useful tool in a range of different fields by enabling a computer to solve a problem without being explicitly programmed to do so, but rather by learning from a series of known examples. This paper presents a new methodology that uses ANNs to predict the presence of features in a pipeline. First, the location and characteristics of a junction have been predicted as a way to identify elements of the topology of a pipeline followed by iden- tification of the location and sizing of a leak. The ANN characteristics and training approaches have been determined for both the jun...

p.2: 2 ===== data or from an available model and is data-driven in its application because it only requires measured transient head data to locate and characterize the desired features. In addition, the computational ef- fort of the proposed technique is concentrated in the ANN training stage, but once this stage is complete, the technique can process and find leaks and/or topological features from different transient head traces almost immediately, without the need of retrain the ANN. Considering that this is the first reported joint application of fluid transients and ANNs, the examples and the functioning of the tech- nique are demonstrated only with numerically derived data. How- ever, the promising results of this first application prove the promising potential of this approach and offer insights for future validations (with experimental and field data) and applications in more complex systems. The methodology proposed in this paper is applied to the loca- tion and characterization of different features in a single pipeline. It is shown that the technique is successful in accurately predicting the location of the feature within the pipeline and its size, and it proves the potential...

p.3: 3 ===== characteristics of the pipeline are required, and some approaches depend on knowing the transient pressure trace of an intact pipe- line. In addition, experience is required to interpret the resulting pressure trace due to the existence of vibrations, background tran- sients, and instrument noise ( Colombo et al. 2009 ). Although the majority of previous techniques have achieved sat- isfactory results in the task of detecting elements of the system top- ology or locating a leak using pressure transients, these methods require information about the analyzed pipeline (physical charac- teristics and resulting transient pressure traces after installation) or a detailed numerical model (model-based techniques). In addition, to obtain results extensive field tests may be needed, or a significant computational time is required for the analysis of each transient pressure trace obtained from a test. Thus, there is an advantage in using data-driven techniques that can provide accurate results fast and with the potential of applications to different water pipe- lines configurations. ANNs have had a broad set of applications in different fields, and they have become a powerful tool in ...

p.10: 10 ===== location smaller than 2.32 meters in 95% of the examples tested with a virtually perfect prediction of the diameter sizes on each side of the pipeline junction. In addition, for the location and sizing of a leak, the trained ANN can also accurately predict the leak location with an error smaller than 3.0 mm in 95% of the examples tested with an average absolute error of 0.03 mm in the prediction of the leak size. These results demonstrate the outstanding potential of using machine learning techniques and fluid transient waves for the location of topological elements and anomalies in pipelines. The approach proposed is fast, accurate, and data-driven because no previous information of the system or a hydraulic transient numeri- cal model is required for the testing stage; only a transient head variation trace is needed. Considering that this is the first application of fluid transient waves and ANNs, the proposed approach has been tested in sim- ple hydraulic systems with data obtained numerically; however, some challenges arise when the same technique is applied to more complex situations, and the impact of these challenges will be ad- dressed in future field tests of the ...

p.11: 11 ===== Gong, J., M. F. Lambert, A. Zecchin, and A. Simpson. 2016. “Experimental verification of pipeline frequency response extraction and leak detection using the inverse repeat signal. ” J. Hydraul. Res. 54 (2): 210 –219. https://doi.org/10.1080/00221686.2015.1116115. Gong, J., A. R. Simpson, M. F. Lambert, A. C. Zecchin, Y . I. Kim, and A. Tijsseling. 2013b. “Detection of distributed deterioration in single pipes using transient reflections. ” J. Pipeline Syst. Eng. Pract. 4 (1): 32–40. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)PS.1949-1204.0000111. Guo, G., S. Liu, Y . Wu, J. Li, R. Zhou, and X. Zhu. 2018.“Short-term water demand forecast based on deep learning method. ” J. Water Resour. Plann. Manage. 144 (12): 04018076. https://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE) WR.1943-5452.0000992. Guo, W., L. Soibelman, and J. H. Garrett. 2009. “Visual pattern recognition supporting defect reporting and condition assessment of wastewater col- lection systems.” J. Comput. Civ. Eng. 23 (3): 160 –169. https://doi.org /10.1061/(ASCE)0887-3801(2009)23:3(160). Guo, X., K. Yang, F. Li, T. Wang, and H. Fu. 2012. “Analysis of first transient pressure oscillation for leak detection in a single pipeline. ” J. Hydrodyn. 24...