Physics-informed_neural_network_model_for_transient_wave_propagation_in_a_pressu.txt
hits=6

p.1: This paper explores the use of neural networks (NNs) to model water-hammer waves propagation in a bounded pipe system. The training dataset is obtained from a numerical solution using the Method Of Characteristics (MOC). It is found that conventional NNs fail to model the water-hammer waves propagation when trained using only the boundary conditions and require large datasets for training. However, the use of physics-informed NN (PINN), wherein the one-dimensional wave equation, along with the boundary conditions are imposed as part of the loss function , provides accurate results. The PINN model parameters (i.e., weights and biases) are optimized using (i) the Adaptive Moment Estimation (A DAM), and (ii) the limited -memory Broyden -Fletcher- Goldfarb-Shanno (L-BFGS) algorithms. The results show that L-BFGS based solution is in good agreement with the exact MOC solution, whereas the ADAM-based solution has slow convergence . Moreover, it is found that the PINN solution is sensitive to changes in boundary and initial conditions as well as to the time length of the wavefield solution. In particular, our results show that as the time length (or bandwidth) of the signals increases, a ...

p.2: where ( ),h x t is the pressure head, a is the wave speed,  0,tT is the time,  0,xL denotes the space, with L and T being the total length of the pipe, and the total time of the experiment, respectively. The initial condition (ICs) and boundary conditions (BCs) are

p.3: Consider a reservoir-pipe-reservoir system of length 100L = m, diameter 0.1D = m, and wave speed 1000a = m.s-1. The steady-state pressure head and flow rate in the system are 0 20H = m and 0 4Q = l.s-1, respectively. The numerical simulations are performed using the MOC. The transient wave is generated by perturbing the pressure head at the downstream end in the form of a Gaussian pulse (Eq. [3]). The pipe section is discretized with 2x= m and the temporal discretization is 0.002t= s. The total simulation time is 4 / 0.4T L a== s which includes one complete wave period. The simulated wavefield solution is shown in Figure 2 wherein both x and y axes are respectively non-dimensionalized with respect to L and /La , and the color pattern shows the non- dimensionalized pressure head of the system with respect to Joukowsky’s pressure (Wylie and Streeter, 1993).

p.8: PINN model has accurately reproduced the response (see Figure 10(c)). Accurately modeling high frequency waves is an important aspect because high frequency waves are required in transient based defect detection methods (Lee et al., 2015; Waqar et al., 2022) to localize defect more accurately (higher resolution).

p.10: In this paper, the framework of a physics-informed neural network (PINN) is explored to predict the hydraulic transient response of a reservoir-pipe-reservoir system. The results of the PINN model are compared with the exact MOC solution and with the ordinary NN model. The results show that the PINN algorithm can predict the transient response of the system throughout the pipe domain. However, it is also noticed that the accuracy of the model is sensitive to the (i) frequency bandwidth of the signals, (ii) time length of the solution, and (iii) spatial location of data points as constraints. In particular, the results demonstrate that as the length or frequency bandwidth of the signal increases, a denser PINN architecture is required to accurately predict the response of the system. Furthermore, i t is noticed that some measure ment locations bring more benefit s in terms of optimizing the model than others. More research is required to further elucidate the sensitivity of PINN models concerning constraining datasets and PINN architecture. Currently, the PINN framework is being extended for the case where the effect of friction and fluid -structure interaction are included (e.g. , ...

p.10: Alkhalifah, T., Song, C., bin Waheed, U., & Hao, Q. (2021). Wavefield solutions from machine learned functions constrained by the Helmholtz equation. Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences, 2, 11 -19. Baydin, A. G., Pearlmutter, B. A., Radul, A. A., & Siskind, J. M. (2018). Automatic differentiation in machine learning: a survey. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 18, 1-43. Ghidaoui, M. S. (2004). On the fundamental equations of water hammer. Urban Water Journal, 1(2), 71 -83. Huang, X., Liu, H., Shi, B., Wang, Z., Yang, K., Li, Y., ... & Dong, B. (2021). Solving Partial Differential Equations with Point Source Based on Physics-Informed Neural Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.01394. Karniadakis, G. E., Kevrekidis, I. G., Lu, L., Perdikaris, P., Wang, S., & Yang, L. (2021). Physics -informed machine learning. Nature Reviews Physics, 3(6), 422-440. Kingma, D. P., & Ba, J. (2014). Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980. Lai, Z., Mylonas, C., Nagarajaiah, S., & Chatzi, E. (2021). Structural identification with physics -informed neural ordinary differential equations. Journal of Sound and Vibration, 508, 116196. Lee, P. J., Duan, H. F., Tuck, J....