SOURCE: 02-2021-A new comprehensive filtering model for pump shut-in water hammer pressure wave signals during hydraulic fracturing.pdf
PAGES: 13
FULL extract 13 pages



===== PAGE 1 =====
Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 208 (2022) 109796
Available online 3 November 2021
0920-4105/© 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
A new comprehensive filtering model for pump shut-in water hammer 
pressure wave signals during hydraulic fracturing 
Yujiao Li, Xiaodong Hu
*
, Fujian Zhou, Yang Qiu, Zhuolong Li, Yinghao Luo 
China University of Petroleum-Beijing, Beijing 102249, China   
ARTICLE INFO  
Keywords: 
Comprehensive filtering 
Water hammer pressure wave signals 
Spectrum analysis 
Hampel filter 
Adaptive noise cancellation 
ABSTRACT  
In the process of fracturing, the position of the fractures can be identified by analyzing the spectrum of the water 
hammer pressure wave signals after pump shut-in. However, the collected water hammer pressure data contain a 
lot of noises, which brings difficulty to the spectrum analysis and affect the accuracy of the final results. 
Removing multiple kinds of noises while protecting useful fracture response is the challenge. However, the 
filtering model for the water hammer pressure wave signals is absent. This paper proposes a new comprehensive 
filtering model for pump shut-in water hammer pressure wave signals. The filtering model contains three parts. 
First, we designed a two-step filtering method, including Hampel filter and FIR low-pass filter, to filter signals in 
the main channel. Second, multi-frequency-adaptive notch and median filter were combined to construct the 
signals in the reference channel, which can be used to protect the useful frequency of the water hammer wave 
signals and pressure response of the fractures from being eliminated. Third, the filtered signal is obtained by 
adaptive cancellation between the signals in the main channel and the reference channel. After that, the filtering 
effects of signals with and without fractures were studied by constructing simulated signals and collecting the 
signals in the laboratory experiment. The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) gain and the mean square error (MSE) 
reduction were selected as indicators for the model validation, and the cepstrum was also used as the indicator to 
verify the preservation of fracture response characteristics. Besides, the noise adaptive range of the model was 
evaluated by increasing the noise intensity to the constructing signal. This research can provide a new and useful 
filtering method for water hammer pressure wave signals in the field.   
1. Introduction 
Hydraulic fracturing, as an efficient stimulation technology, has been 
widely used in various oil and gas reservoir reconstruction and achieved 
remarkable results ( Li et al., 2020 ). A large number of production 
practices have proven that hydraulic fracturing is the key technology for 
unconventional reservoir reconstruction and efficient development 
( Cong et al., 2021 ). It is an effective way for the development of the 
unconventional oil and gas reservoir ( Wang et al., 2018a , b ; Cong et al., 
2022 ). High viscosity fracturing fluid were pumped through the well -
bore into the reservoir by the high-pressure pumps on the surface. Then 
fractures were generated, creating new fluid channels between the 
reservoir and the wellbore ( Adachi et al., 2007 ). Whether fractures are 
open in all the designed perforation position is an essential issue in 
hydraulic fracturing. The fracture locations (or the flow entrance) are a 
critical parameter in hydraulic fracturing evaluation. Therefore, analysis 
and evaluation of the fracture location is a necessary requirement of 
hydraulic fracturing diagnostics. Water hammer fracture diagnostics has 
been developed and validated in the field application since 2016 ( Bog -
dan et al., 2016 ; Korkin et al., 2020 ). Fracture diagnostics based on 
water hammer pressure wave signals can identify the fracture locations 
by analyzing the spectrum characteristics of water hammer signals, 
which has advantages of low cost, easy operation, and great real-time 
performance ( Bogdan et al., 2016 ; Klem et al., 2017 ; Kabannik et al., 
2018 ). 
The principle of water hammer fracturing diagnostics is as follows. 
When the pumps shut down during the hydraulic fracturing, the sudden 
change of the fluid flow rate at the wellhead causes rapid pressure 
change inside the wellbore, known as “ water hammers ” ( Connor et al., 
2018 ). Water hammer signatures are caused by tube waves traveling 
down to the wellbore from the surface, meeting completion components 
(such as tube end, fractures, tube expansion, or a combination of all 
these factors) and then traveling back ( Parkhonyuk et al., 2018 ). Simply 
put, a water hammer is a pressure wave that transmits throughout the 
* Corresponding author. 
E-mail address: huxiaodong@cup.edu.cn (X. Hu).  
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect 
Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 
journal homepag e: www.else vier.com/loc ate/petro l 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.petrol.2021.109796 
Received 27 August 2021; Received in revised form 18 October 2021; Accepted 1 November 2021   

===== PAGE 2 =====
Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 208 (2022) 109796
2
well hydraulic system. In the process of transmission, the pressure wave 
is attenuated due to the energy loss. Water hammer characteristics are 
determined by the shut-in process, wellbore geometry, fluid properties 
in the well, hydraulic fracture geometry, and rock physical properties 
around the fractures (Ma et al., 2019). In previous studies, the inter -
pretation of water hammer signatures can be used as a simple diagnostic 
tool to characterize hydraulic fractures. The collected water hammer 
pressure wave signals contain the pressure response characteristics of 
fractures (the water hammer wave propagates along the pipeline and is 
reflected by the hydraulically connected fractures, resulting in sudden 
changes of ground pressure and carrying fracture information). 
However, various fluctuation events, such as pipeline vibration and 
fracture opening, are unavoidable during fracturing and pump shut -
down. The water hammer pressure wave signals collected in field con -
tains a lot of spike noises, random noises, and fixed-frequency noises. 
The existence of these noises will substantially interfere the time- 
frequency analysis and the pressure response analysis of the water 
hammer pressure wave signals, thus affecting the accuracy of fracture 
localisation. Therefore, how to use reasonable filtering methods to filter 
out various of noises is a crucial problem in water hammer fracturing 
diagnostics. At the same time, it is necessary to protect the fracture in -
formation in the signals. This process requires a more accurate filtering 
model. 
At present, the research on filtering methods in the oil industry 
mainly focuses on seismic exploration, wireless measurement while 
drilling, and oil and gas production prediction. In seismic exploration, 
an adaptive method is a very effective filtering method. Liang and Mike, 
(2009) proposed an adaptive FK filtering algorithm, which can remove 
noises surface micro-seismic data. The algorithm mainly combined the 
geometric features of surface seismic sequence with the distribution 
features of micro-seismic events. Then it improved the SNR of 
micro-seismic signals by superposition processing method. Liu et al. 
(2012) suppressed random noises in seismic signals by combining EMD 
with adaptive thresholds for translation and scale invariance. Song et al. 
(2013) proposed an improved method of adaptive estimation filtering, 
considering the addition of constraints to make the iterative method 
move towards the direction of expected convergence. Peng et al. (2019) 
adopted an adaptive bilateral filtering method based on multiple win -
dows to suppress the noises in the complex fault block area, which could 
better maintain the edge information. In the wireless MWD system, the 
adaptive filtering method and its improved algorithm combined with 
other methods are commonly used. Li and Reckmann (2009) proposed a 
filtering method based on the adaptive algorithm. The fundamental 
frequency of pump noise was taken as the frequency of the reference 
signal to realize effective filtering. Qiao et al. (2016) proposed a new 
filtering algorithm by analyzing the noises of mud pulse signals. An 
adaptive notch was used to reduce the correlation between the signals in 
the main channel and the reference channel, thus protecting the helpful 
signal from being canceled. Peng (2018) proposed a signal processing 
method combining adaptive notch filter and adaptive filter. The adap -
tive notch filter filtered the valuable components, and then the output of 
the notch filter was used as the reference signal of the adaptive filter. Li 
(2019) studied noise reduction methods from the perspectives of adap -
tive denoising method based on pump-impact interference model and 
zero-space tracking. In oil and gas production prediction, Kalman filter 
is often used in many prediction methods. Kalman filter is also a special 
adaptive method. Wang and Li (2010) proposed an improved ensemble 
Kalman filtering method, which can avoid the inconsistency caused by 
the dynamic field update. Li (2012) used a semi-iterative ensemble 
Kalman filter to solve the problem that dynamic reservoir field is not 
consistent with reservoir model in nonlinear problems, which can 
accurately invert nonlinear parameters. Liu et al. (2020) preprocessed 
injection-production data using Kalman filtering algorithm and 
nonlinear diffusion filter respectively. This process reduces interference 
with the machine learning model. 
In these research fields, some filtering ideas are effective 
combinations of several filtering methods. The adaptive approach is one 
that is often considered. The limitations of previous combined filtering 
methods for water hammer pressure wave signals are discussed as fol -
lows. Firstly, spike noises significantly influence the pressure response 
information in cepstrum analysis. Many of these combined filtering 
methods do not consider eliminating spike noises interference. Sec -
ondly, how to protect the pressure response of the fracture (which is 
shown as small fluctuations at certain moments on the pressure wave 
curve) should be taken into account in the filtering of the water hammer 
pressure wave signals. Otherwise, it will easily lead to misjudgment and 
affect fracture location identification. It is a large challenge to remove a 
variety of noises while protecting useful pressure response of fractures. 
Hence, it is essential to develop a comprehensive filtering method for 
water hammer pressure wave signals. 
This paper proposes a new comprehensive filtering model for water 
hammer pressure wave signals, Fixed Parameter Filter-Adaptive Filter 
(FPF-AF). The comprehensive filtering model is based on the adaptive 
noise cancellation. Firstly, we proposed a two-step filtering method for 
the spike noises and high-frequency noises in the main channel of the 
adaptive noise canceller, that is, the filtering method combining Hampel 
filtering and FIR low-pass filtering. The model ensures that the noises 
obviously different from the useful signal can be filtered out efficiently. 
At the same time, the input quality of the signal in the main channel is 
guaranteed. Secondly, aiming at the difficulty of obtaining the noises in 
the reference input, we innovatively proposed a construction method in 
the reference channel based on the Multiple Frequency Adaptive Notch- 
Median Filter (MFAN-MF). The multi-frequency adaptive notch is 
adopted to remove the oscillation frequency of irregular sine wave or 
irregular square wave. The median filtering to remove baseline drift is 
introduced to filter excessive trend fluctuation caused by pressure 
response of the fractures. At the same time, the noise trend can be 
removed to make the amplitude fall to zero fluctuation. Finally, the 
noise constructed by the MFAN-MF method is input into the adaptive 
noise canceller, which is cancelled with the signal obtained by the two- 
step filtering method. Simulation signals and laboratory signals verify 
the effectiveness and feasibility of the comprehensive filtering method. 
This research can provide a new and useful filtering model for water 
hammer pressure wave signals in the field. 
2. Signal characteristics and method analysis 
There are many kind of noises in the water hammer pressure wave 
signals, including spike noises, random noises, fixed frequency noises 
close to the frequency of the useful signal, and fixed frequency noises 
which are much different from the useful signal frequency. Spike noises 
refer to the abnormal burr, jump, and other interference in the signal 
due to the working environment influence and the device manufacturing 
process. Random noises mainly refer to the noises whose frequency and 
propagation direction have no fixed rules. The fixed frequency noises 
refer to the noises whose frequency is fixed and will not change. The 
fixed frequency noises generated in the fracturing process may be the 
noises that are significantly different from or close to the frequency of 
the water hammer pressure wave signals. This paper proposes a new 
comprehensive filter model of Fixed Parameter Filter - Adaptive Filter. 
2.1. Filtering model development 
First of all, considering that the noise amplitude is large and the types 
of noise are many, and the pressure response of the fractures need to be 
protected, it is best to use a simple and effective adaptive filter for 
denoising. Our model is based on adaptive noise canceller. Generally, 
according to the basic structure of adaptive noise canceller and 
considering the characteristics of water hammer pressure wave signals, 
our model can be divided into three parts: (1) Main input channel:A two- 
step filtering method for the main input signal; (2) Reference input 
channel: A Multiple Frequency Adaptive Notch - Median Filter (MFAN- 
Y. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

===== PAGE 3 =====
Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 208 (2022) 109796
3
MF) method for the reference input signal. (3) Adaptive noise cancel -
lation between the main input signal and the reference input signal. We 
will present the derivations as follows. 
Main input channel: A two-step filtering method for water 
hammer signal with noise . There are many types of noise in the 
collected signal. We can initially filter the noises which can be easily 
separated from the useful signals. Generally, smooth filtering is carried 
out first. We need to design a suitable filtering scheme to filter out the 
spike noises. At the same time, high-frequency noises are removed 
within the desired accuracy and acceptable time limits. In addition, the 
signal processing in the previous step should not be distorted to affect 
the signal processing in the later step. Considering the characteristics of 
water hammer pressure wave signals, we design a two-step filtering 
method for initial filtering. Firstly, the Hampel filter is selected to filter 
the spike noises, and then the FIR (Finite Impulse Response) filter is used 
to filter the high-frequency noises. 
The acquired signal r(t) generally contains noises caused by system 
or environment instability, which will produce a lot of spike noises. The 
commonly used method to remove the spike noises is the median filter. 
Although this method can filter out the abnormal spike noises, it may 
also delete many original signal data points. The filter closely related to 
the median filter is the Hampel filter. The Hampel filter works like a 
median filter, but it only replaces values a few standard deviations away 
from the local median value ( Jiang et al., 2011 ). This filter can help 
remove outliers from the signal without over-smoothing the data. For a 
given sample of data x
s
, the algorithm: 1. Centers the window of odd 
length at the current sample. 2. Computes the local median m
i
, and 
standard deviation σ
i
, over the current data window. 3. Compares the 
current sample with n
σ
× σ
i
, where n
σ 
is the threshold value. If | x
s
 
m
i
| > n
σ
× σ
i
, the filter identifies the current sample x
s 
as an outlier and 
replaces it with the median value, m
i
. Consider a frame of data that is 
passed into the Hampel filter. After smoothing by the Hampel function, 
the signal p ( t ) is obtained. And the spike noises are filtered out. 
After removing the spike noises, the signal p(t) contains many fixed 
frequency noises, which is wildly different from the useful signal fre -
quency. In order not to cause too much influence on the subsequent 
analysis, we use FIR low-pass filter to filter the high-frequency noises. 
The FIR low-pass filtering method can effectively filter out part of the 
high-frequency noises. The full name of the FIR filter is a finite impulse 
response filter. Because the filter has good linear phase characteristics, it 
has been widely used in digital signal processing ( Huang, 2019 ). Fre -
quency response of the FIR low-pass filter has three ranges: passband, 
stopband, and transition band. The frequency response is close to 0 in 
the stopband and close to 1 in the passband ( Shao et al., 2017 ). If the 
response of its unit sample is a finite sequence of points M + 1, and the 
input signal is the convolution of p ( n ) and h ( n ) , that is: 
d ( n ) =
∑
M
k = 0
p ( k ) h ( n   k ) = p ( n ) ∗ h ( n ) (1) 
Where ‘* ’ represents the convolution operation, h ( n ) is the response 
of unit sampling, and p ( n ) is the input signal of the FIR low-pass filter. 
The transfer function of this filter can be expressed as: 
H ( z ) =
∑
M
n = 0
h ( n ) z
  n
= h ( 0 ) + h ( n ) z
  1
+ ... + h ( M ) z
  M
(2)  
where H ( z ) is the transfer function. After processing such a filter, the 
signal d ( t ) is obtained, which filters out part of the high-frequency 
noises. 
Reference input channel: A Multiple Frequency Adaptive Notch 
- Median Filter ( MFAN-MF) method for the noise input signal . When 
we use adaptive noise cancellation method to filter, the signal in the 
reference channel is the noise signal. It is difficult to select the input 
signal of the noise channel. The noise can be extracted from the signal in 
the main channel as the reference signal, but there are the following 
problems: because the signal in the main channel contains useful signals, 
when some useful signal components are input to the reference channel, 
the useful signals in the final output will be partially eliminate. There -
fore, we need to separate the useful information in the noise channel in 
order to protect the useful signals from being eliminate. Finally, we 
propose a MFAN-MF method for reference channel. 
For the water hammer pressure wave signals, the oscillation fre -
quency is one of the useful information needs to be protected. Therefore, 
filtering the useful oscillation frequency in the reference channel is 
necessary during the noise signal construction. A multi-frequency 
adaptive notch is adopted. The signal d ( t ) is input into the multi- 
frequency adaptive notch filter and cancels with the input reference 
signal x ( t ) several times. Until you get a noise v ( t ) that does not contain 
the useful signal frequency. The frequency value of this reference signal 
x ( t ) is set to the useful frequency value. The adaptive notch filter has two 
outputs: filter output and notch output. Compared with the ordinary 
digital filter, the adaptive notch filter has a narrower stopband and 
passband ( Wang et al., 2018a , b ). The out-of-band attenuation is faster. 
Therefore, it can realize narrow-band filtering and narrow-band notch. 
Recursive process of adaptive notch filter: 
⎧
⎪
⎪
⎨
⎪
⎪
⎩
y ( k ) = ω
c
( k ) x
c
( k ) + ω
s
( k ) x
s
( k )
v
1
( k ) = d ( k )   y ( k )
ω
c
( k + 1 ) = ω
c
( k ) + 2 μ v
1
( k ) x
c
( k )
ω
s
( k + 1 ) = ω
s
( k ) + 2 μ v
1
( k ) x
s
( k )
(3) 
where x
c
( k ) and x
s
( k ) are the two reference signals, ω
c
( k ) and ω
s
( k )
are the weight coefficients of the two reference signals, μ is the step 
factor, d ( k ) is the input signal, y ( k ) is the filtering output, and v
1
( k ) is the 
output after the first notch. The multi-frequency adaptive notch filter 
adopts a cascade structure. The output of the first stage notch filter is the 
input of the second stage notch filter. The zeros and poles of the 
cascaded system correspond to the zeros and poles of each notch filter 
respectively. we can directly change adjustment parameters of one stage 
without affecting the other stage of the notch filter ( Liu, 2008 ). It has the 
advantages of the single-frequency notch filter and makes the perfor -
mance adjustment simple and effective ( Chen, 2016 ). The useful fre -
quency in the water hammer pressure wave signal is not necessarily a 
single certain frequency, at this time, it is necessary to go through 
several notch filters for processing until these frequency components are 
removed. The number of the multi-frequency adaptive notch filter is 
determined according to the frequency component of the useful signal. 
The output of the upper notch filter is the input of the next notch filter. 
After a multi-frequency adaptive notch operation, the output can be 
obtained as v ( t ) . 
The pressure response of the fracture showing small fluctuations in 
the pressure curve is another useful information that needs to be pro -
tected. Median filter is adopted. In addition, considering that the 
amplitude of the constructed noise should be near zero, we introduce the 
idea of removing baseline drift to de-trend the signal. Combined with the 
previous step, the median filtering to remove baseline drift can be 
directly adopted, which makes the filtering operation simpler and im -
proves the efficiency of filtering. The median filter is a nonlinear digital 
filtering technology that can suppress noises and protect the edge. The 
basic idea of using the median filtering method to remove the baseline 
drift is as follows: first, removing the more enormous value in the signal 
to obtain the trend signal containing only the baseline. Then superim -
pose it with the original signal to eliminate the baseline drift interfer -
ence in the original signal. The median filtering principle: the value of a 
point in the signal is replaced by the median value of each point in a 
neighborhood of the point ( Xu et al., 2012 ). The application of median 
filtering to baseline drift has two functions: one is to remove excessive 
trend fluctuation at the pressure response of the fracture. And the other 
is to make the amplitude of the resulting noise fluctuate around zero. 
Here, the input signal is the output signal of the adaptive notch filter, 
and the size of the sliding window of the median filter is L = 2 R + 1, L <
N ( Zhao et al., 2012 ). Then the signal processed by the median filter is: 
Y. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

===== PAGE 4 =====
Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 208 (2022) 109796
4
n ( t ) =
⎧
⎨
⎩
v ( t )   Med [ v ( 1 ) , v ( 2 ) ... v ( t + R )] ( 1 ≤ t ≤ R )
v ( t )   Med [ v ( t   R ) ... v ( t ) ... v ( t + R )] ( R ≤ t ≤ N   R )
v ( t )   Med [ v ( t   R ) , v ( t   R + 1 ) ... v ( N )] ( N   R ≤ t ≤ N )
(4)  
where n ( t ) is the signal processed by the median filter, v ( t ) is the 
adaptive notch filter ’ s output signal, R is the neighborhood size around a 
certain point. N is the signal length. 
Adaptive noise cancellation between the main input signal and 
the reference input signal. After the above two parts of processing, we 
get the signal in the main channel and the reference channel. Finally, we 
can filter the residual noises by adaptive noise canceller. The noise n ( t )
without the signal frequency is input into the adaptive noise canceller, 
which cancels with the signal d ( t ) after filtering out the high-frequency 
noises. And finally, the filtered signal e ( t ) is obtained. The core of the 
adaptive noise canceller is the adaptive filter, which is controlled by the 
adaptive algorithm to achieve the best filtering. Here, one input of the 
adaptive noise cancellation system is the signal d ( t ) after filtering part of 
the high-frequency noises through the FIR low-pass filter. The other 
input is the noise n ( t ) obtained after the median filter to remove the 
baseline drift, which is related to the noises contained in the original 
signal. The principle of adaptive noise cancellation is as follows ( Ma and 
Cheng, 2016 ). It is assumed that the original input end of the adaptive 
noise cancellation system be d
j
, d
j
= s
j
+ n
0
, where s is the useful signal, 
n
0 
is the noise to be canceled and is not related to s .The reference input 
end is n
1
, where n
1 
is the noise related to n
0 
but unrelated to s . And the 
output of the system is e
j
, e
j
= d
j
  y
j
. Here, the filter ’ s transmission 
function can be adjusted automatically according to the system ’ s output 
signal. Assuming that s , n
1
, and n
0 
are all stationary random processes 
with zero mean: 
e
j
= d
j
  y
j
= s
j
+ n
0
  y
j
(5) 
where e
j 
is the output of the adaptive noise canceller, d
j 
is the original 
input signal, and y
j 
is the filter output. The mean square value of the 
output signal is expressed as: 
E
[
e
2
j
]
= E
[ 
d
j
  y
j
)
2
]
= E
[ 
s
j
+ n
0
  y
j
)
2
]
= E
[
s
2
j
]
= E
[ 
n
0
  y
j
)
2
]
+ 2 E
[
s
j
 
n
0
  y
j
)]
(6) 
Since s is not correlated with n
0 
and n
1
, so s is not correlated with y
j
, 
then: 
E
[
e
2
j
]
= E
[
s
2
j
]
+ E
[(
n
0
  y
j
)
2
]
(7)  
where E [ s
2
j
] represents the power of the signal. As can be seen from the 
above expression, if you want the output signal to contain only useful 
signals or the mean square value of the output signal to be minimum, 
E [( n
0
  y
j
)
2
] it must obtain a minimum value. According to Eq. (6) , the 
equivalence condition is that E [( e
j
  s
j
)
2
] is required to obtain the min -
imum value. The mean square value of the error between the output 
signal and the useful signal is required to be minimum. The error output 
e of the system is the best approximation of the useful signal s . 
2.2. Filtering process 
The process of the comprehensive filtering method shows in Fig. 1 . 
As discussed above, we can divide all the process into three parts: (1) 
Main input channel:A two-step filtering method for the main input 
signal; (2) Reference input channel: A MFAN-MF method for the noise 
input signal. (3) Adaptive noise cancellation between the main input 
signal and the reference input signal. The collected signal r(t) contains 
spike noises, random noises, low-frequency noises and high-frequency 
noises, and we hope to obtain accurate physical parameters from the 
signal. 
In part 1, we can perform a two-step filter for the easily separated 
spike noises and the high-frequency noises. Firstly, Hampel filter is used 
to filter out the spike noises, and the filtered signal is denoted as p(t). 
The filter not only helps to remove the spike noises, but also does not 
over-smooth the data. Then the FIR filtering algorithm is used to filter 
out the high-frequency noises and get the signal in the main channel d 
(t). In part 2, we need to separate the noise from the signal d(t) by using 
the noise channel construction method. The main channel input of the 
adaptive notch is d(n), the input of the reference channel is the sinu -
soidal signal x(t) whose frequency is equal to the oscillation frequency, 
and the output is the signal v(t) without the oscillation frequency. The 
signal v
1
(t) is obtained after median filtering of the signal v(t). The slight 
fluctuation of the pressure response in v
1
(t) is smoothed out. Then v(t) 
minus the smoothed signal v
1
(t) to de-trend, which is used as the 
reference signal of the adaptive noise canceller, denoted as n(n). n(n) 
almost does not contain useful signal. In this way, the useful signal can 
be well protected in the output signal e(n), and the accuracy of the 
Fig. 1. New comprehensive filtering method flow.  
Y. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

===== PAGE 5 =====
Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 208 (2022) 109796
5
filtering result can be improved. In part 3, the filtered signal e(t) can be 
obtained through adaptive noise canceller. Then we can analyze the 
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and mean square error (MSE) of the water 
hammer pressure wave signal e(t). 
2.3. Model evaluation indicators 
Signal to noise ratio (SNR) and mean square error (MSE). After 
the water hammer wave signal is filtered by the comprehensive method, 
the evaluation indicators are the signal to noise ratio (SNR) and mean 
square error (MSE). The smaller the MSE, the larger the SNR and the 
better the filtering effect. The SNR can be calculated by Eq. (8) . 
SNR =
P
signal
P
noise
=
(
A
signal
A
noise
)
2
(8)  
where P
signal 
is the signal power, P
noise 
is the noise power, A
signal 
is the 
signal amplitude, A
noise 
is the noise amplitude. The SNR is generally 
measured in decibel (dB), which can be expressed as Eq. (9) . 
SNR ( dB ) = 10 log
10
(
P
signal
P
noise
)
= 20 log
10
(
A
signal
A
noise
)
(9) 
The mean square error (MSE) refers to the mean square of the vari -
ance between the original signal and the filtered signal. The MSE can be 
calculated according to Eq. (10) . 
MSE =
1
n
∑
n
i = 1
 
x
obs , i
  x
mldel , i
)
(10)  
where x
obs , i 
is the original signal, x
mldel , i 
is estimated signal after filtering, 
n is sequence number, i is serial number. 
Cepstrum . Cepstrum analysis of voice and image processing are 
widely used in nonlinear signal processing technology. Here cepstrum is 
used as the indicator to verify the preservation of pressure response 
characteristics. Cepstrum is the inverse Fourier transform of the Fourier 
transform spectrum of a signal after logarithmic operation. The calcu -
lation principle of cepstrum is shown in Fig. 2 . The reflection informa -
tion generated by water hammer wave signals and multi-fracture 
reaction in fracturing process can be analyzed directly by cepstrum, and 
the peak value can be found by nonlinear processing method. 
3. Results and analysis 
3.1. Simulated pressure wave signal without fractures 
The water hammer pressure wave signals containing various noises 
are simulated and verified to prove validity and feasibility of the 
method. The simulated water hammer pressure wave signals without 
fractures is constructed, and different noises are added to the simulated 
signal. The effect of comprehensive filtering method is studied, and the 
change of SNR and MSE is analyzed. 
The details of constructing a pure signal are as follows: The sinu -
soidal signal with amplitude attenuation represents the normal ampli -
tude attenuation of the water hammer pressure wave signals after the 
pump is stopped. Besides, the signal front part represents the pressure 
before stopping the pump by a supplemental 10 s signal. After a certain 
amplitude processing, the simulated signal can show that the water 
hammer pressure wave signals without fractures. On the whole, the 
simulated water hammer pressure wave signal is a sinusoidal signal with 
amplitude attenuation ( Fig. 3 a). The thick arrow position indicates that 
the pressure begins to drop suddenly after the pump is stopped at 10 s. 
The simulated signal frequency is within 1 Hz, the main frequency is 
0.1286 Hz, and the spectrum has a long tail ( Fig. 3 b). 
The details of constructing the simulated signal with noise are as 
follows: Spike noises, random noises, low-frequency noises of fixed 
frequency which is close to useful signal frequency, and high-frequency 
noises of fixed frequency which is different from useful signal frequency 
are added into the pure signal. The specific process is simplified as fol -
lows: 
r ( t ) = s ( t ) + g ( t ) + n ( t ) + q ( t ) + m ( t ) (11)  
where r ( t ) is the signal collected by the signal acquisition system. s ( t ) is 
the water hammer pressure wave signal. g ( t ) is the spike noise. n ( t ) is the 
random noise. q ( t ) is the high-frequency noise with a significant fre -
quency difference, and m ( t ) is the low-frequency noise with a close 
frequency. 
The simulated signal with noise is shown in Fig. 4 a. We adopt the 
comprehensive filtering model to filter the simulated signal. In Fig. 4 b, 
the red part is the first step to remove the spike noises by Hampel 
function. In Hampel filtering, the filtering series should be set to odd 
number. The filter level doesn ’ t need to be too high, so just set it to 9. We 
can see that the spike noises are removed without over-smoothing the 
overall signal. Fig. 4 c shows the signal after adopting FIR low-pass 
filtering in the second step, and the high-frequency noises and random 
noises are partially suppressed. The noises are significantly reduced. 
Fig. 4 d is the signal processed by the adaptive noise canceller, the signal 
output by the comprehensive filtering model. It can be seen that the 
noise has been further reduced. 
After the water hammer pressure wave signal is filtered by the 
comprehensive method, the evaluation indicators are the signal to noise 
ratio (SNR) and mean square error (MSE). In general, the smaller the 
MSE, the better the filtering effect; The larger the SNR, the better the 
filtering result. Comparison of SNR and MSE of signals before and after 
comprehensive filtering is shown in Fig. 5 . Fig. 5 a shows the SNR before 
and after the comprehensive filtering. Before the filtering, the SNR is 
about 27.42971 dB. After Hampel filtering, the SNR is about 29.78231 
dB. After FIR low-pass filtering, the SNR is about 32.63344 dB. After the 
comprehensive filtering, the SNR is about 34.274 dB. And the SNR gain 
is about 6.84429 dB. Fig. 5 b reflects the MSE before and after the 
comprehensive filtering. Before the filtering, the MSE is about 0.1017. 
After Hampel filtering, the MSE is about 0.0794. After FIR low-pass 
filtering, the MSE is about 0.0572. After the comprehensive filtering, 
the MSE is about 0.0473. The MSE decreases about 0.0544. The SNR and 
MSE of the signals are significantly changed after filtering. After 
comprehensive filtering, the SNR is higher than that of single Hampel 
filtering and FIR low-pass filtering, and the MSE is lower than that of 
single Hampel filtering and FIR low-pass filtering. The noise is reduced 
substantially after filtering. 
3.2. Experimental pressure wave signal without fractures 
To further verify the comprehensive filtering model, the signals 
collected in the laboratory are used for verification. We set up a test 
device for water hammer pressure wave signals, which disturbed the 
fluid in the main line through the rapid closing of the valve to generate 
pressure wave. In the test, the pressure in the main line (that is, the 
system pressure) was in the range of   0.15 MPa to 0.5 MPa, the liquid 
Fig. 2. The calculation principle of cepstrum.  
Y. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

===== PAGE 6 =====
Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 208 (2022) 109796
6
density was 1 g/cm
3
, and the liquid temperature was 293 K. The sam -
pling frequency is f
s 
= 500 Hz. The signal collected in the laboratory is 
shown in Fig. 6 a, which contains a lot of noise. The new comprehensive 
filtering model is adopted to de-noise. The red part shown in Fig. 6 b is 
the signal filtered by the Hampel function, and a large number of 
abnormal spike noises are filtered out. The yellow part is the signal after 
FIR low-pass filtering, which further filters out part of high frequency 
noises and random noises. Fig. 6 c shows the final output signal by 
comprehensive filtering, and it can be seen that the water hammer 
characteristics are well preserved. 
The validity of the filtering results is further verified by spectrum 
analysis. The spectrum of the signal collected in the laboratory is shown 
in Fig. 7 a. The main frequency of the signal is about 0.21 Hz. After 
comprehensive filtering, the signal is shown in Fig. 7 b. The main fre -
quency of water hammer pressure wave signals is clearly displayed at 
the peak value, while the high frequency can be attenuated. The noise 
outside the useful signal band can be effectively suppressed. 
3.3. Simulated pressure wave signal with fractures 
The details of constructing the pure simulated signal with fractures 
are as follows: Firstly, a sinusoidal signal with amplitude attenuation is 
constructed to represent the normal amplitude attenuation of the water 
hammer pressure wave signals. Then, different sinusoidal signals with 
Fig. 3. Simulated signal without fractures and the signal spectrum: (a) simulated signal without fractures; (b) spectrum of the simulated signal without fractures.  
Fig. 4. Simulated signal with noise and the signals after filtering: (a) simulated signal with noise; (b) the signal after Hampel filtering; (c) the signal after FIR low- 
pass filtering; (d) the signal after adaptive noise cancellation. 
Y. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

===== PAGE 7 =====
Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 208 (2022) 109796
7
amplitude attenuation were added at 13.33 s and 13.36 s, respectively. 
In this way, various pressure disturbances were added at a specified time 
to characterize the dynamic response time at two fractures. Finally, after 
the superposition structure and a certain amplitude treatment, the 
simulated signal representing the water hammer pressure wave signals 
characteristics is obtained. As a whole, the simulated signal of the water 
hammer pressure wave signal is attenuated ( Fig. 8 a). The thick arrow 
position indicates that the pressure begins to drop after the pump is 
stopped at 10 s. The enlarged part indicated by the dashed arrow rep -
resents the pressure drop caused by the water hammer pressure wave 
signals passing through multiple fractures. The corresponding abscissa is 
13.33 s and 13.36 s, respectively, which is the pressure response time of 
multi-fracture fluctuation. The spectrum of the simulated signal is 
shown in Fig. 8 b. The frequency is within 1 Hz, the main frequency is 
0.1286 Hz, and the spectrum has a long tail. The one-dimensional 
cepstrum of the signal is shown in Fig. 8 c. The pressure response ob -
tained by cepstrum analysis are 13.33 s and 13.36 s, respectively, which 
are consistent with the pressure response of multi-fracture fluctuation 
constructed by the simulated signal above. Therefore, the cepstrum 
analysis can reasonably identify the pressure responses of multi- 
fracture. 
The method of constructing the simulated signal with noise is as 
Fig. 5. Comparison of SNR and MSE before and after comprehensive filtering: (a) comparison of SNR before and after filtering; (b) comparison of MSE before and 
after filtering. 
Fig. 6. Signal acquired in the laboratory and the signals after filtering: (a) signal acquired in the laboratory; (b) comparison of signal in the filtering process; (c) 
signal after comprehensive filtering. 
Y. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

===== PAGE 8 =====
Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 208 (2022) 109796
8
follows: the spike noises, random noises, low-frequency noises of fixed 
frequency which is close to the useful signal frequency, and high- 
frequency noises of fixed frequency which is much different from the 
useful frequency are added into the pure simulated signal with two 
fractures. The simulated signal containing noise is shown in Fig. 9 a. We 
adopted the new comprehensive filtering model to filter the simulated 
signal. The red part in Fig. 9 b is the first step to remove the spike noise 
by Hampel function. You can see that a lot of the spike noises have been 
filtered out without over-smoothing the overall curve. Fig. 9 c shows the 
signal after adopting FIR low-pass filtering in the second step, and the 
high-frequency noises and random noises are partially suppressed. 
Fig. 9 d is the signal after adaptive noise cancellation, that is, the signal 
after the comprehensive filtering. The noises are further filtered out, and 
it can be seen that the pressure response of fracture is also preserved. 
And the pressure response of two fractures can be identified as 13.33 s 
and 13.36 s, respectively. 
The comparison of SNR and MSE of signal with fractures before and 
after comprehensive filtering is shown in Fig. 10 . Fig. 10 a shows the SNR 
before and after the comprehensive filtering. The SNR before filtering is 
about 27.41844 dB. After Hampel filtering, the SNR is about 29.78164 
dB. After FIR low-pass filtering, the SNR is about 32.63201 dB. After the 
comprehensive filtering, the SNR is about 34.21982 dB, and the SNR 
gain is about 6.80138 dB. Fig. 10 b shows the MSE before and after the 
comprehensive filtering. The MSE before filtering is about 0.1047. After 
Hampel filtering, the MSE is about 0.0797. After FIR low-pass filtering, 
the MSE is about 0.0574. After the comprehensive filtering, the MSE is 
Fig. 7. Spectrum of the signal before and after filtering: (a) spectrum of the signal collected in the laboratory; (b) spectrum of the signal after comprehensive filtering.  
Fig. 8. Simulated signal with fractures, the signal spectrum and the signal cepstrum: (a) simulated signal with fractures; (b) spectrum of simulated signal with 
fractures; (c) cepstrum of simulated signal with fractures. 
Y. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

===== PAGE 9 =====
Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 208 (2022) 109796
9
about 0.0478, and the MSE decreases about 0.0569. After the compre -
hensive filtering, the SNR of the water hammer pressure wave signal 
with fractures is improved, and the MSE is reduced. Moreover, the 
filtering effect is better than that of single Hampel filtering and FIR low- 
pass filtering. 
The spectrum of the signal with fractures after comprehensive 
filtering is shown in Fig. 11 a. The high frequency component is filtered 
out. And the main frequency of the water hammer pressure wave signal 
is retained, which is 0.1286 Hz. The one-dimensional cepstrum of the 
signal is shown in Fig. 11 b. The response times obtained by cepstrum 
analysis are 13.33 s and 13.36 s, which are consistent with the two 
pressure-response-times above. 
4. Evaluation of noises effect 
This model has a good effect on the water hammer pressure wave 
signals without fractures. Identifying response time should be taken into 
account when the comprehensive filtering model is used to filter the 
Fig. 9. Simulated signal with noise and the signals after filtering: (a) simulated signal with noise; (b) the signal after Hampel filtering; (c) the signal after FIR low- 
pass filtering; (d) the signal after adaptive noise cancellation. 
Fig. 10. Comparison of SNR and MSE before and after comprehensive filtering: (a) comparison of SNR before and after filtering; (b) comparison of MSE before and 
after filtering. 
Y. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

===== PAGE 10 =====
Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 208 (2022) 109796
10
signal with fractures. The added noises will have different degrees of 
influence on the filtering effect, so it has certain limitations. If the added 
noises are too large, the pressure response of fracture will be completely 
submerged, then the pressure response after filtering will be challenging 
to identify. The influence of noise intensity on the model is discussed 
below, and the boundary of adding noise intensity is explained. 
Effect of low-frequency noises. Because the useful frequency of the 
water hammer pressure wave signals is low frequency, low-frequency 
noises affect the overall shape of the signal but have little influence on 
the information at the pressure response. Adding too much low- 
frequency noises cause great distortion to the whole signal oscillation 
and reduce the SNR. When excessive low-frequency noises are added to 
the water hammer pressure wave signals with fractures ( Fig. 12 a), the 
overall shape of the signal produces excellent distortion, but the pres -
sure response time is not submerged at this time. After filtering, the 
pressure response of fracture ( Fig. 12 b) is basically preserved, but the 
overall distortion of the signal still exists. After analyzing the filtered 
signal cepstrum ( Fig. 12 c), the response time is 13.33 s and 13.36 s, 
respectively, which is consistent with the two pressure response times. 
Under this verification condition, the more extensive low-frequency 
noises only affect the signal overall shape and does not have much 
interference to the recognition of pressure response times. 
Effect of high-frequency noises. High-frequency noises have a 
great influence on the pressure response times. The excessive high- 
Fig. 11. Spectrum and cepstrum of the filtered signal with fractures: (a) spectrum of filtered signal with fractures; (b) cepstrum of filtered signal with fractures.  
Fig. 12. The case after adding excessive low-frequency noises: (a) signal after adding excessive low-frequency noises; (b) signal after filtering out excessive low- 
frequency noises; (c) cepstrum of the signal after filtering out excessive low-frequency noises. 
Y. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

===== PAGE 11 =====
Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 208 (2022) 109796
11
frequency noises will drown the information at the pressure response 
times. After filtering, useful information will be lost, and the pressure 
response location cannot be accurately identified. When excessive high- 
frequency noises are added to the water hammer pressure wave signal 
with fractures ( Fig. 13 a), the high-frequency noises in a certain period 
will produce more intensive oscillations, the pressure response of the 
fractures is completely submerged. After filtering, the pressure response 
of the fractures ( Fig. 13 b) has greatly interfered. It can ’ t be recognized. 
By analyzing the signal cepstrum ( Fig. 13 c), the specific position of the 
pressure response time cannot be read out. Under this verification 
condition, the high-frequency noises produce too much interference to 
identify response time and even wholly drown the pressure response 
information. 
Effect of random noises. Random noises will also have a great 
impact on the identification of pressure response time. Too much 
random noises can also drown out pressure response time. After 
filtering, the pressure response time will be lost, and the pressure 
response location cannot be accurately identified, thus affecting the 
judgment of the fracture location. When excessive random noises are 
added to the water hammer pressure wave signal with fractures 
( Fig. 14 a), the pressure response time are entirely submerged by the 
random noises. After filtering, we cannot identify the pressure response 
of the fractures ( Fig. 14 b), and the pressure response time cannot be 
accurately read from the cepstrum of the signal ( Fig. 14 c). Under this 
verification condition, excessive random noises will also cause signifi -
cant interference in identifying pressure response time or even 
completely drown the pressure response information. 
Selection of noises amplitude. Under the condition of this model, 
we can obtain the limit of noise intensity through multiple tests. In the 
test, we set the amplitude of low-frequency noises and high-frequency 
noises to change from 0.01 and increase 0.01 each time. Similarly, the 
standard deviation of random noises to change from 0.01 and increase 
0.01 each time. After changing the range each time, we observed the 
effect before and after filtering until the signal failed to recognize the 
pressure response of the fractures after filtering. The limit of noise in -
tensity is as follows: First, the maximum amplitude of low-frequency 
noises should be about 0.15. Otherwise, although the pressure 
response time will not be submerged and can be identified after filtering, 
the overall distortion of the signal will be too large, resulting in low SNR 
of the filtered signal. Second, the maximum amplitude of high-frequency 
noises should be about 0.2. Otherwise, the pressure response of the 
fractures will be drowned, resulting in unidentifiable information of the 
pressure response time after filtering. Third, random noises variance 
should be less than 0.15
2
. Otherwise, the pressure response time will be 
submerged, resulting in the pressure response of the fractures cannot be 
identified after filtering. Finally, since both the random noises and the 
high-frequency noises have a significant influence on the pressure 
response time, the random noises and the high-frequency noises cannot 
be greater than the two limits at the same time. Excessive random noises 
and high-frequency noises will drown the pressure response time, 
resulting in the loss of useful information after filtering. 
5. Conclusions and limitation 
A new comprehensive filtering model of Fixed Parameter Filter - 
Adaptive Filter is studied in this paper to eliminate the noises in the 
water hammer pressure wave signals, which is contains three parts: (1) 
Main input channel:A two-step filtering method for the main input 
signal; (2) Reference input channel: A MFAN-MF method for the noise 
reference input signal. (3) Adaptive noise cancellation between the main 
Fig. 13. The case after adding excessive high-frequency noises: (a) signal after adding excessive high-frequency noises; (b) signal after filtering out excessive high- 
frequency noises; (c) cepstrum of the signal after filtering out excessive high-frequency noises. 
Y. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

===== PAGE 12 =====
Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 208 (2022) 109796
12
input signal and the reference input signal. 
In the simulation test, this model is effective. For the water hammer 
pressure wave signals without fractures, the SNR gain is about 6.84429 
dB, and the MSE can be reduced by about 0.0544. However, for the 
water hammer pressure wave signal with fractures, the SNR gain is 
about 6.80138 dB, the MSE can be reduced to about 0.0569, and the 
pressure response time can be well retained and identified. Signals 
collected in the laboratory are also used for verification. The results 
show that this model can retain the useful signals well and filter the 
noises. 
This method has certain requirements for the noise intensity of the 
water hammer pressure wave signals with fractures. Within a certain 
range, the amplitude of low-frequency noise is about 0.15, the amplitude 
of high-frequency noise is about 0.2, and the variance of random noise is 
less than 0.15
2
. Besides, the random noises and the high-frequency 
noises should not be greater than the two limits simultaneously. 
Credit author statement 
Yujiao Li: Conceptualization, Methodology, Data analysis, Visuali -
zation and Writing. Xiaodong Hu: Funding acquisition, Supervision, 
Conceptualization, Writing-Review and Editing. Fujian Zhou: Supervi -
sion. Yang Qiu: Validation. Zhuolong Li: Software. Yinghao Luo: Data 
Curation. 
Declaration of competing interest 
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper. 
Acknowledgments 
The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from 
National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 52004300). 
References 
Adachi, J., Siebrits, E., Peirce, A., Desroches, J., 2007. Computer simulation of hydraulic 
fractures. Int. J. Rock Mech. Min. Sci. 44 (5), 739 – 757 . 
Bogdan, A.V., Keilers, A., Oussoltsev, D., 2016. Real-time interpretation of leakIsolation 
with degradable diverter using High frequency pressure monitoring. In: SPE Asia 
Pacific Oil & Gas Conference and Exhibition. Perth, Australia .  
Chen, J., 2016. The design and implementation of adaptive notch filter based on LMS 
algorithm. Journal of Ankang University 28 (5), 113 – 116 . 
Cong, Z Y, Li, Y W, Liu, Y, et al., 2021. A new method for calculating the direction of 
fracture propagation by stress numerical search based on the displacement 
discontinuity method. Comput. Geotech. 140, 104482 . 
Cong, Z.Y., Li, Y., Pan, Y., et al., 2022. Study on CO
2 
foam fracturing model and fracture 
propagation simulation. Energy 238, Part B, 121778 . 
Connor, J. Clark, Miskimins, Jennifer L., Gallegos, Dana L., 2018. Diagnostic applications 
of borehole hydraulic signal processing. In: Unconventional Resources Technology 
Conference. Houston, Texas, USA .  
Huang, S.Q., 2019. Design and simulation experiment of FIR low-pass filter based on 
FPGA. China Water Transport 19 (3), 97-98, 123 .  
Jiang, X.H., Xie, C.X., Zou, Y.B., 2011. A monitoring information denoising method 
under strong noise. J. S. China Univ. Technol. 39 (4), 66 – 69 . 
Kabannik, A., Parkhonyuk, S., Korkin, R., Litvinets, F., Dunaeva, A., Nikolaev, M., 
Usoltsev, D., 2018. Can we trust the diversion pressure as a decision-making tool: 
novel technique reveals the truth. In: Abu Dhabi International Petroleum Exhibition 
& Conference. United Arab Emirates, Abu Dhabi .  
Klem, R.A., Rutzinger, G., Shulman, M., Pedam, S., Keilers, A., Bogdan, A., 
Oussoltsev, D., 2017. Sequenced fracturing technique improves production from an 
underperforming lateral: an interpretation based on high frequency pressure 
monitoring. In: SPE Hydraulic Fracturing Technology Conference and Exhibition. 
The Woodlands, Texas, United States .  
Korkin, R., Parkhonyuk, S., Fedorov, A., Badazhkov, D., Kabannik, A., 2020. High 
frequency pressure monitoring and data analytics for stimulation efficiency 
Fig. 14. The case after adding excessive random noises: (a) signal after adding excessive random noises; (b) signal after filtering out excessive random noises; (c) 
cepstrum of the signal after filtering out excessive random noises. 
Y. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        

===== PAGE 13 =====
Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 208 (2022) 109796
13
determination: new perspectives or potential limits. In: The SPE Hydraulic 
Fracturing Technology Conference and Exhibition. The Woodlands, Texas, USA.  
Li, M.H., 2012. Study on Inversion Problem of Non-linear and Non-gaussian Reservoir 
Based on Ensemble Kalman Filter. China University of Petroleum, East China.  
Li, Y.Q., 2019. Research on Noise Elimination Method of High-Speed Mud Pulse Signal. 
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. 
Li J, Reckmann H, 2009. System and Method for Pump Noise Cancellation in Mud Pulse 
Telemetry: US, US7577528. 
Li, Y.W., Long, M., Tang, J.Z., et al., 2020. A hydraulic fracture height mathematical 
model considering the influence of plastic region at fracture tip. Petrol. Explor. Dev. 
47 (1), 175–185. 
Liang, C.T., Mike, P., 2009. Improving signal-to-noise ratio of passive seismic data with 
an adaptive FK filter. In: SEG Houston 2009 International Exposition and Annual 
Meeting, pp. 1703–1707. 
Liu, F.F., 2008. A study of interference rejection based on adaptive notch filter. Applied 
Science and Technology (9), 33–38. 
Liu, Y.P., Li, Y., Ma, H.T., 2012. Seismic random noise reduction by empirical mode 
decomposition combined with translation invariant scale-adaptive threshold. 
International Conference on Wavelet Analysis and Pattern Recognition. IEEE 53–57. 
Liu, W., Liu, W., Gu, J.W., et al., 2020. Research on interwell connectivity of oil 
reservoirs based on Kalman filter and artificial neural network. Petroleum Geology 
and Recovery Efficiency 27 (2), 118–124. 
Ma, L.K., Cheng, L.B., 2016. Adaptive Noise Canceller Design Based on MATLAB, vol. 6. 
Electronics World, pp. 44–45. 
Ma, X., Fuping Zhou, F.P., Alberto Ortega Andrade, J., Gosavi, Shekhar V., 
Burch, Damian, 2019. Evaluation of water hammer analysis as diagnostic tool for 
hydraulic fracturing. In: Unconventional Resources Technology Conference. Denver, 
Colorado, USA.  
Parkhonyuk, S., Fedorov, A., Kabannik, A., 2018. Measurements while fracturing: 
nonintrusive method of hydraulic fracturing monitoring. In: SPE Hydraulic 
Fracturing Technology Conference and Exhibition. The Woodlands, Texas, USA.  
Peng, Y.X., 2018. Research on the Filtering and Decoding Technology of Continuous 
Wave Mud Pulser Signal. China University of Petroleum (East China).  
Peng, H.L., Deng, Y., He, J.W., et al., 2019. Post-stack seismic data denoising based on 
multi- window adaptive bilateral filtering and its application. Geophys. Prospect. 
Pet. 58 (1), 63–70. 
Qiao, Z.C., Tang, L.X., Liu, H., 2016. Adaptive filtering algorithm for cancelling the pump 
noise in the mud pulse signal. Chin. J. Sci. Instrum. 37 (7), 1477–1484. 
Shao, P., Wu, Z.J., Peng, H., et al., 2017. FIR low-pass digital filter design using improved 
PSO algorithms. Computer Science 44 (z1), 136-138, 156.  
Song, W.Q., He, K., Guo, Q.S., Jiang, Y.D., 2013. Research on adaptive filtering method 
of micro seismic data. Geophys. Prospect. Pet. 52 (3), 229–233. 
Wang, Y.D., Li, M.H., 2010. Application of ensemble Kalman filter in nonlinear reservoir 
problem. Journal of China University of Petroleum (Edition of Natural Science) 34 
(5), 188–192. 
Wang, Y., Ying, Q.R., Lei, Y., Wang, D., Jin, B.Q., 2018a. Adaptive notch filter with real 
time disturbance frequency control. J. Electron. Dev. 41 (2), 405–410. 
Wang, W., Yu, W., Hu, X., Liu, H., Chen, Y., Wu, K., Wu, B., 2018b. A semi analytical 
model for simulating real gas transport in nano pores and complex fractures of shale 
gas reservoirs. AIChE J. 64 (1), 326–337. 
Xu, H., Wang, D.D., Jiang, T.B., 2012. Research on the ECG signal denoising algorithm 
based on wavelet transform and the median filter. Automation & Instrumentation. 
27 (12), 46–49. 
Zhao, J., Hao, J.F., Zhang, D.M., 2012. Application of Fast Median Filter in Filtering 
Baseline Drift of ECG Signal, vol. 4. Electronics World, pp. 50–51. 
Y. Li et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        