SOURCE: 05-2023-A New Investigation of Wellbore Parameters Influence on Shut-In Pressure Transient Signatures.pdf
PAGES: 16
FULL extract 16 pages



===== PAGE 1 =====
SPE-215709-MS
A New Investigation of Wellbore Parameters Influence on Shut-In Pressure
Transient Signatures from Water Hammer Fracture Diagnostics
Yang Qiu, Xiaodong Hu, Fujian Zhou, Pukang Yi, Yajing Wang, and Zongshuai Jiang, National Key Laboratory of
Petroleum Resources and Engineering / China University of Petroleum Beijing, Beijing, China
Copyright 2023, Society of Petroleum Engineers DOI 10.2118/215709-MS
This paper was prepared for presentation at the SPE International Hydraulic Fracturing Technology Conference and Exhibition held in Muscat, Sultanate of Oman,
12 - 14 September 2023.
This paper was selected for presentation by an SPE program committee following review of information contained in an abstract submitted by the author(s). Contents
of the paper have not been reviewed by the Society of Petroleum Engineers and are subject to correction by the author(s). The material does not necessarily reflect
any position of the Society of Petroleum Engineers, its officers, or members. Electronic reproduction, distribution, or storage of any part of this paper without the written
consent of the Society of Petroleum Engineers is prohibited. Permission to reproduce in print is restricted to an abstract of not more than 300 words; illustrations may
not be copied. The abstract must contain conspicuous acknowledgment of SPE copyright.
Abstract
Water hammer fracture diagnostics has been widely used in recent years, which enables field engineers to
understand the stimulation effect from hydraulic fracturing treatment and optimize the completion strategy
in time. Based on the high frequency acquisition equipment installed at the wellhead, the sampled water
hammer signal is processed to obtain the reflection time of the fracture and the water hammer celerity in
the wellbore, which is utilized to locate the downhole stimulation location. However, only the reflection
time identified from the water hammer signal is used in current application, which means the waste of the
useful information contained in the sampled signal.
In addition, the uncertainty of the water hammer celerity may lead to misjudgment of the downhole
fracture, which is still challenging in nowadays diagnosis. Thus, profound investigation of the water hammer
reflection characteristics and the its utilization to accurately identify the information of downhole events
is the key. Water hammer travels through the wellbore, carrying information about wellbore parameters,
which are easy to obtain in the fracturing design or during the treatment. Studying the effect of wellbore
parameters helps better understand the details of the water hammer, which helps accurately identify the
fracture information. In this paper, the influence of the wellbore parameters on the water hammer reflection
details is studied for the first time based on the numerical study, including the wellbore cementing and
diameter change. Besides, water hammer signals from field cases are also studied, and the waveform
characteristics related with wellbore parameters influence was analyzed, providing some useful guidelines
for field application. The results of our study can improve the identification accuracy and provide useful
insight for water hammer diagnostics.
Introduction
Multistage fracturing in horizontal well is an important development method for unconventional resources
such as tight oil and shale gas (Yong et al. 2021
; Jamaloei et al. 2022). However, due to formation
heterogeneity and the failure of the bridge plug or ball during hydraulic fracturing treatment, not all
perforating clusters contribute to production, which lead to the waste of construction resources ( Haustveit
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPEIHFT/​proceedings-pdf/​23IHFT/​23IHFT/​3250845/​spe-215709-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026

===== PAGE 2 =====
2 SPE-215709-MS
et al. 2017; Parkhonyuk et al., 2018a; Weddle et al., 2018; Ma et al. 2020). Fracturing diagnosis techniques
help provide fracturing stimulation evaluation, guide the on-site completion decisions, and ensure the effect
of fracturing treatment, which has been widely developed and applied in recent years (Bhatnagar et al.,
2016
; Watson et al., 2022; Leggett et al., 2023; Olson et al., 2023; Shokanov et al., 2023).
Water hammer diagnostics, as a real-time, simple operation, low-cost and non-intrusive fracturing
diagnosis technique, has been applied since 2016 to evaluate downhole events such as downhole fluid
acceptance location, temporary plug effect, bridge mechanical isolation effect and case leaking in
unconventional oil and gas hydraulic fracturing (Bogdan et al., 2016). The schematic diagram of the
water hammer diagnostics in hydraulic fracturing treatment is shown in Figure 1. The key of locating
downhole events is the determination of the reflection time between wellhead and downhole fracture and
the propagation speed of water hammer in the wellbore (Parkhonyuk et al., 2018b; Korkin et al., 2020). The
pressure transient observed at the end of injection, known as water hammer, is generated at the wellhead
and propagates through the wellbore. While encountering the downhole events, the wave reflects back
to the surface and is collected by the equipment installed at the wellhead. Therefore, the reflection time
obtained from the water hammer contains information about the characteristic depth of the wellbore and
the fracture. Through the signal processing model based on cepstrum analysis, the response time of water
hammer reflection between wellhead and downhole fracture can be obtained.
Figure 1—the schematic diagram of the water hammer diagnostics (Panjaitan et al., 2018).
The water hammer celerity depends on several parameters, including the pressure, temperature, borehole
geometry and fluid properties (Rutzinger et al., 2017). The typical celerity value varies from 4,000 and 5,500
ft/s (about 1219 to 1676 m/s). It is challenging to accurately calculate the speed of the water hammer travel
through the wellbore and decrease the water hammer celerity uncertainty. Large variation range will lead
to huge error in water hammer diagnosis results. At present, the determination of water hammer celerity in
water hammer diagnostics is based on Bayesian algorithm (Kabannik et al., 2018; Parkhonyuk et al., 2018b;
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPEIHFT/​proceedings-pdf/​23IHFT/​23IHFT/​3250845/​spe-215709-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026

===== PAGE 3 =====
SPE-215709-MS 3
Korkin et al., 2020). Finally, combined with the response time of fracture reflection and the celerity of water
hammer pressure wave, the location of downhole fluid entrance point is identified.
However, only the reflection time identified from the water hammer signal is used in current application,
which means the waste of downhole information carried in the water hammer exists and the limitation of
the evaluation effect in water hammer diagnostics (
Iriarte et al. 2017 ). In addition, due to the uncertainty
of the water hammer celerity, the inaccurate understanding of the water hammer wave propagation speed
in the wellbore may lead to the misjudgment of the downhole fracture. Therefore, it is very important to
deeply study the reflection characteristics in the water hammer waveform and utilize the wave reflection
characteristics and the known information to enhance and accurately understand the information of
downhole events. The wellbore parameters are easy to obtain in the fracturing design or during the treatment.
Water hammer travels through the wellbore, carrying information about wellbore parameters. Thus, studying
the effect of wellbore parameters helps better understand the details of the water hammer, which helps
accurately identify the fracture information
In this paper, a water hammer simulator based on fluid transient model is developed, and the influence
of the wellbore parameters on the water hammer reflection details is studied for the first time, including the
wellbore cementing and diameter change. Besides, water hammer signals from field cases are also studied,
and the waveform characteristics related with wellbore parameters influence was analyzed, providing some
useful guidelines for the water hammer diagnostics.
Water hammer simulation model
Transient flow model.
 After pumps shut-in, the water hammer is generated at the wellhead. At the end of
the fracturing, with the rapid reduction of the flow rate at the surface, the water hammer is generated at the
wellhead and propagates through the wellbore. When the water hammer encounters the downhole boundary
(the fracture or other condition), it reflects and propagates back to the wellhead, collected at the wellhead
by pressure transducer (Liang et al., 2017). This pressure transient in the wellbore can be modeled through
the equations of motion and continuity (Carey et al., 2015; Ma et al., 2019),
(1)
(2)
where a is the water hammer celerity in the wellbore, A is the wellbore cross-sectional area, H is the pressure
head, Q is the flow rate in the pipeline, D is the wellbore diameter, and f is the wellbore friction coefficient,
t is the time, x is the measured depth along the well.
The equation (1)  and (2) can be converted from two partial differential equations to four ordinary
differential equations by the method of characteristic. The arranged characteristic line equations are as
follows:
(3)
Using these equations and the known value at the time t. The pressure head H and flow rate Q at the
time t+∆t at the intersection of characteristic lines can be obtained by the integral of differential equations,
which can be solved in the form of finite difference, and the second order approximation is used to sort
out the formula and integrate it,
(4)
(5)
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPEIHFT/​proceedings-pdf/​23IHFT/​23IHFT/​3250845/​spe-215709-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026

===== PAGE 4 =====
4 SPE-215709-MS
where B and R represent the pipe characteristic impedance and the resistance coefficient of the pipe
respectively,
(6)
(7)
Under initial conditions, H and Q are known for each position i at the wellbore. The H and Q after time
∆t can be calculated from the known values at position i-1 and i+1 at time t. Therefore, the finite difference
form can be written as:
(8)
(9)
The H and Q of each position in each time step can be solved by equation (8) and (9),
(10)
(11)
where CP, BP, CM and BM are
(12)
(13)
CM=Hi+1t−BQi+1t, (14)
(14)
Boundary conditions.  To solve the propagation of water hammer wave in wellbore, the boundary
conditions specification is needed. In this model, the fluid injected at the wellhead is assumed at the rate
of Q0, which is linearly decreased to 0 in a very short time. The outlet boundary of the model is set as the
constant pressure boundary. The existence of fractures communicated the formation pressure system and
the well bottom (Carey et al. 2015; Dung et al., 2021). However, this paper mainly studies the propagation
behavior in the wellbore and the influence of wellbore parameters, which simplifies the setting of bottom
hole condition.
Wellbore parameters configuration
Wellbore cementing. During the completion process, cement outside the casing is not returned to the
surface. The water hammer celerity in the wellbore can be calculated by (KLEM et al., 2017),
(16)
(17)
where a is the water hammer celerity traveling in the wellbore, ω is the specific gravity of the fluid, g is the
acceleration of gravity, K is the volume modulus of fluid, d is the pipe diameter, c is cementing coefficient,
E is the Young's modulus of the pipeline, e is the pipe thickness, μ is the Poisson ratio of pipe, G is the
shear modulus of rock.
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPEIHFT/​proceedings-pdf/​23IHFT/​23IHFT/​3250845/​spe-215709-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026

===== PAGE 5 =====
SPE-215709-MS 5
The water hammer celerity in the wellbore with or without cementing can be described by the cementing
coefficient calculated by equation (17), where the celerity will change significantly. Thus, the influence of
wellbore cementing on the wellhead water hammer can be simulated by adjusting the celerity in different
wellbore segments in the model.
Wellbore diameter variation. When it comes to the wellbore diameter variation, the wellbore can be
assumed as two pipe section with different diameter, as pipe j and pipe k shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2—the grid connection schematic of the wellbore diameter variation section.
The additional configuration is introduced to solve the H and Q at the end of pipe j. The boundary
condition will be solved by the continuity equation (18) and (19), where it is assumed that the head loss at
the pipe connection is ignored. By substituting equation (18) and (19) into equation (8) and (9), the solution
of wellbore section j and k can obtain H and Q of the diameter variation position.
(18)
(19)
Model validation. First, we used the experimental data of Hu et al. (2022). A 156-m-long steel pipe
with diameter of 0.025m for the experiment was installed (Hu et al., 2022). The inlet of the pipeline was
connected with a continuously variable speed pump to provide continuous flow in the long pipeline. The
sensor was located 40 m away from the upstream end. The pipe outlet provided the pressure boundary
through the connecting of the pressure vessel. The flow rate before the pump shutdown was 0.033m 3/min,
and the shutdown time of the pump was 6 second. The measured pressure response at a distance of 40
m upstream was compared with the numerical results simulated by our model in this paper, as shown in
Figure 3. The numerical results are in good agreement with the experimental data, and the wave reflection
characteristic has been accurately captured.
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPEIHFT/​proceedings-pdf/​23IHFT/​23IHFT/​3250845/​spe-215709-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026

===== PAGE 6 =====
6 SPE-215709-MS
Figure 3—Comparison of the numerical results and experimental sampled data in a uniformly long pipeline.
Second, experimental data of Gong et al.(2014) were used to verify the water hammer transient in the
pipe with locally enlarged diameter (Zhang et al., 2021). The length of the pipe was 37.46m with the inner
diameter is 22.14 mm. The total length of the pipeline with the enlarged diameter 22.96 mm was 1.649 mm,
which was located at 17.805 m upstream of the valve. The valve quickly closed. The comparison between
numerical and experimental results was shown in Figure 4, which was observed in good consistent.
Figure 4—Comparison of the numerical and experimental results in the pipe with locally enlarged diameter.
Simulation results and discussion
Water hammer reflection characteristic. Figure 5(a) displays a result of the wellhead water hammer
simulated by our water hammer model in a uniformly wellbore, indicating that water hammer signatures
can reproduce the main features observed in the field data. The parameter values are ρ=1000 kg/m3, water
hammer celerity in the wellbore a=1600 m/s, and wellbore length L=3000 m. The initial injection rate Q0=
3 m3/min, and the time of the inlet flow rate decreasing to zero in 0.8 s. Figure 5(b) shows the 3 reflection
features of reflection characteristics in the wellhead water hammer propagating through the wellbore: (i)
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPEIHFT/​proceedings-pdf/​23IHFT/​23IHFT/​3250845/​spe-215709-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026

===== PAGE 7 =====
SPE-215709-MS 7
as the injection rate decreases, the pressure drop at the wellhead occurs immediately, (ii) due to the line
pack effect, the water hammer waveform shows a slow trend of pressure decreasing, rather than a horizontal
platform (no pressure change), and (iii) the first fracture reflection at the bottom traveling back to the surface
and the rapid pressure increase occurs.
The pressure drop in the reflection feature (i) of the wellhead water hammer is caused by the decrease of
the injection rate. meanwhile, effective information about the fracture only appears in the wellhead water
hammer signal after the first fracture reflection (in the reflection feature (iii)). Thus, the pure influence of
wellbore parameters on wellhead water hammer is concentrated in the reflection feature (ii) of the water
hammer reflection characteristics. The detailed investigation in the reflection feature (ii) is the key to study
the influence of wellbore cementing and its diameter variation on wellhead water hammer signature details.
Figure 5—(a) the overall wellhead water hammer simulation result in a uniformly
wellbore. (b)the zoomed in water hammer result to illustrate the reflection characteristics.
The effect of the wellbore cementing. Water hammer wave has different reflection characteristics under
different properties of pipes. In this section, 4 cases are designed to analyze the wellhead water hammer
response characteristics. The wellbore schematic of uncemented and cemented section are shown in Figure
6
.
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPEIHFT/​proceedings-pdf/​23IHFT/​23IHFT/​3250845/​spe-215709-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026

===== PAGE 8 =====
8 SPE-215709-MS
Figure 6—the wellbore schematic of uncemented and cemented section.
The simulation results are shown in Figure 7(a). In the reflection feature (ii) of the water hammer, the
pressure trend is the same in the uncemented and fully cemented wellbore. This is because the decline of
this section is affected by the wellbore friction, which is the embodiment of the line pack effect ( Walters
et al. 2019 ). For the partially cemented wellbore, the cementing section accelerates the original pressure
drop trend, which leads to a pressure trend change in the reflection feature (ii) of the water hammer. The
pressure trend change occurs at the time 2.857 s and 1.428 s, respectively. Combining the water hammer
celerity, the location calculated by these response times is about 2000 and 1000 m, indicating the length
of the uncemented wellbore. The duration time of the pressure trend change is 0.8 s, which is consistent
with the pump shut-in time. As the length of the cementing section becomes longer, the reflection of the
fracture appears more quickly, which indicating the average wave velocity inside the wellbore increases.
In our cases, the fracture reflection time of the fully cemented wellbore is 0.535 s earlier than that of the
uncemented wellbore, and the water hammer celerity of the cementing section is about 14% higher than
that of the uncemented section. Wellbore cementing can significantly increase the speed of water hammer
wave propagation in the wellbore, which is crucial for accurate diagnosis of downhole fracture location.
Meanwhile, the peak and valley value of wellhead water hammer wave increases gradually with the increase
of cementing section length. The energy dissipation of the water hammer in the cementing wellbore is
smaller, and the amplitude of the water hammer is larger. With the reflection of the water hammer in the
wellbore (after the reflection feature (iii)), the wellhead water hammer becomes more complex in partial
cemented wells.
The effect of the wellbore diameter variation size. In this section, the effect of the wellbore diameter
variation size on the response characteristics of wellhead water hammer wave is discussed with 5 simulation
cases. The diameter variation position is located at the 2500 m in the fully cementing wellbore with the 50-
m-long diameter variation section. The variation diameters are 0.08, 0.1, 0.125, 0.15 and 0.2 m, respectively.
The results are shown in the Figure 7(b). The wellbore with smaller diameter will accelerate the decline
trend of the pressure in the wellhead water hammer, while the wellbore with the enlarged diameter slows
down the pressure drop tendency. The reason of this phenomenon is the change of the wellbore diameter
alters the impedance at the corresponding position, where the water hammer wave reflects. The positive
or negative reflection coefficient determines the pressure change in the reflection feature (ii) of the water
hammer. The reflection coefficient is calculated as follows (
Dunham et al. 2023):
(20)
where Z is the impedance of the wellbore diameter variation section, Z w is the characteristic impedance of
the wellbore.
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPEIHFT/​proceedings-pdf/​23IHFT/​23IHFT/​3250845/​spe-215709-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026

===== PAGE 9 =====
SPE-215709-MS 9
When the wellbore diameter decreases, the impedance of the corresponding position Z becomes larger,
which is greater than the characteristic impedance of the wellbore Zw. The reflection coefficient is positive,
and positive reflection occurs, which accelerates the pressure decline trend in the reflection feature (ii) of the
water hammer. As the wellbore diameter increases, the impedance of the corresponding position Z becomes
smaller, which is less than the characteristic impedance of the wellbore Zw. The reflection coefficient is
negative, and negative reflection occurs, which deaccelerate the pressure decline trend in the reflection
feature (ii) of the water hammer. The magnitude of the pressure change is also related to the size of the
wellbore diameter variation. The greater the diameter change, the larger the water hammer pressure change.
The effect of the wellbore diameter variation position. The effect of the wellbore diameter variation
position on the wellhead water hammer wave is discussed with 4 cases in this section. The variation diameter
is 0.15 m (enlarged diameter) with the length of 50 m. They are located at 1000m, 1500m, 2000m and
2500m positions of the fully cementing wellbore, respectively. The results are shown in Figure 7(c)
. In the
reflection feature (ii) of the water hammer, negative pressure reflection appears successively. The time of
occurrence is 1.25, 1.875, 2.5 and 3.125 s respectively. According to the water hammer wave celerity set in
our model, the corresponding enlarged diameter positions are indicated, respectively. The negative pressure
reflection duration was the same in each case (0.063 s in this paper), which was related to the length of the
enlarged diameter section. It is worth noting that during a certain time after the first reflection representing
the wellbore diameter variation, the pressure converted into the initial trend (0.8 s in this paper), which is
consistent with the time that injection rate becomes to zero at the wellhead.
The effect of the wellbore diameter variation length. This section discusses the effect of the wellbore
diameter variation length on the wellhead water hammer wave in 5 cases. The diameter variation position
is located at the 2500 m in the fully cementing wellbore with the 0.1 m diameter (reduced diameter). The
wellbore diameter variation length are 20, 40, 60, 80, and 100 m, respectively. The results are shown in
Figure 7
(d). As the length increases, the positive reflection duration increases in the reflection feature (ii)
of the wellhead water hammer. At the same time, with the increase of reduced diameter section, the average
celerity in the wellbore increases, and the reflection of the downhole fracture becomes earlier gradually.
The numerical simulation results show that the wellbore cementing accelerates the change of pressure
trend and changes the average water hammer celerity in the wellbore. The moment pressure trend alters
depends on the length of the wellbore cementing. The pressure amplitude of pipe diameter change is affected
by the degree of pipe diameter change and the length of pipe diameter change. Wellbore diameter reduction
will show negative reflected pressure increase in the details of the water hammer waveform, while diameter
expansion will show positive reflected pressure subsidence. The position of reflection is related to the
position of reducing diameter, and the duration of reflection is related to the length of reducing section.
The reflection characteristics of wellhead water hammer wave will become more complex whether it is
cementing or partial diameter change in the wellbore. Meanwhile, since these effects are caused by the
change of wellbore parameters, these characteristics will first be reflected in the reflection feature (ii) of
the wellhead water hammer, which takes priority before the reflection feature (iii) of the downhole fracture,
guiding us to process and analyze the complex water hammer signals collected on site.
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPEIHFT/​proceedings-pdf/​23IHFT/​23IHFT/​3250845/​spe-215709-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026

===== PAGE 10 =====
10 SPE-215709-MS
Figure 7—(a) the simulation wellhead water hammer results under different wellbore cementing condition.
(b) the simulation wellhead water hammer results with different wellbore diameter variation size. (c)
the simulation wellhead water hammer results with different wellbore diameter variation position.
(d) the simulation wellhead water hammer results with different wellbore diameter variation length.
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPEIHFT/​proceedings-pdf/​23IHFT/​23IHFT/​3250845/​spe-215709-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026

===== PAGE 11 =====
SPE-215709-MS 11
Field data investigation and analysis
The effect of the wellbore cementing. The first case displayed the effect of the wellbore cementing on
the pump shut-in water hammer signal sampled in well A, which was a typical partially cemented wellbore
fracturing well. The wellbore structure of well A is shown in Figure 8(a). The fracturing casing length was
5028 m and the cement return height is 2950 m. The fracturing interval of this stage was 4300 to 4375m. The
length of the cemented section was 2193 m and the uncemented section is 2182 m. According to the DAS
interpretation of this well, the fluid acceptance location was 4345 m. According to the cepstrum analysis,
the fracture response time of this section was 6.021 s, and the average water hammer celerity in the wellbore
was about 1455 m/s. In the reflection feature (ii) of the wellhead water hammer, there was a clear trend of
increasing pressure drop shown in red and green arrow in Figure 8
(b). The time when the pressure drop
trend increased was about 3.2 s. According to the information of the wellbore structure, the wave velocity
in the cementing section increased by about 14.45 % compared with that in the uncemented section. It had
a good agreement to the results obtained in the previous study of our numerical model.
Figure 8—(a) the wellbore structure of the well A. (b) the pump shut-in wellhead
water hammer signal sampled from well A during hydraulic fracturing treatment.
Reflection time variation during hydraulic fracturing (wellbore cementing quality impact).  The
second example showed the effect of cementing quality on fracture reflection time obtained from the
water hammer diagnostics. Wells A and B were multistage fracturing wells designed in perf-and-plug
completion method in tight reservoirs. the statistical results illustrated that the overall tendency of the
fracture reflection time gradually decreased with the progress of fracturing, which was consistent with the
sequence of fracturing from toe to heel of the wellbore. According to the results of DAS monitoring or
other methods, there was no indication of plug isolation failure, and the stimulation was successfully in the
target stage. Under the circumstance, the measured depth of the target zone decreased, and the reflection
time appeared in the decline trend. However, some reflection times in both well A and B were not following
that trend. For example, in the case of well A in Figure 9 (a), fracture reflection time increased in stage 2 to
6 and stage 11 to 13. According to the previous theoretical study, the presence of cementing section altered
the propagation speed of water hammer in the wellbore. Thus, the cementing quality would also affect the
velocity of water hammer wave in the wellbore to different degrees. In well A, wellbore logging results
showed bad cementing quality from sections 2 to 6 and 11 to 13 at corresponding measured depth. Similar
regularities were also found according to the statistical results of fracture reflection time of well B in Figure
9(b). The cementing quality would change the decline trend of fracture reflection time in the process of
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPEIHFT/​proceedings-pdf/​23IHFT/​23IHFT/​3250845/​spe-215709-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026

===== PAGE 12 =====
12 SPE-215709-MS
fracturing. Whether to slow down or convert to an increasing trend was related to the specific cementing
quality. How to fully consider the effect of the wellbore cementing quality in the water hammer celerity
prediction model in water hammer diagnostics is one of the keys to improve the final diagnosis precision.
Figure 9—(a) the fracture reflection time statistical results and the cementing quality of the
well A. (b) the fracture reflection time statistical results and the cementing quality of the well B.
The effect wellbore diameter variation. In the third example, we discussed the effect of wellbore
diameter variation on the wellhead water hammer. Well structure diagram of well C was shown in Figure
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPEIHFT/​proceedings-pdf/​23IHFT/​23IHFT/​3250845/​spe-215709-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026

===== PAGE 13 =====
SPE-215709-MS 13
10(a). The first section was 3-1/2" tubing with the length of 6030 m. The second section was 7-5/8"
cementing casing with the length of 1310 m, and the third section was 5" uncemented casing hanging from
the bottom of the second section with the length of 2056 m. The blue part represented the downhole packers.
The wellhead water hammer of well C at the end of the fracturing was shown in Figure 10(b)
.
Figure 10—(a) the wellbore structure of the well C. (b) the pump shut-in wellhead water
hammer signal sampled from well B during hydraulic fracturing treatment with labeled arrow.
The red arrows were marked as the points where significant pressure reflection occurred, corresponding
to the wellbore diameter variation in the well structure. The first reflection point was a negative reflection,
corresponding to the enlarged wellbore diameter. The second reflection was positive and corresponded to
the reduction of the wellbore diameter. The time of pressure reflection was 8.28 s and 9.705 s after pump
shutdown, respectively. According to the wellbore diameter variation location and pressure reflection time,
the average celerity corresponding to different wellbore section could be obtained, which was 1462 m/s
and 1512 m/s. Although the diameter of the tubing was small, it was suspended through the wellhead and
the downhole packer and not cemented. the water hammer wave propagated in the tubing was less than
the velocity in the large diameter cementing casing. The cepstrum of the water hammer signal of well C
is shown in the Figure 11
. Multiple responses in the cepstrum existed, representing not only the wellbore
diameter variation. Misjudging the impact of the well structure in the wellhead water hammer would lead
to misdiagnose of the downhole fluid acceptance location.
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPEIHFT/​proceedings-pdf/​23IHFT/​23IHFT/​3250845/​spe-215709-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026

===== PAGE 14 =====
14 SPE-215709-MS
Figure 11—The cepstrum analysis of the water hammer signal sampled
from well C (the response in blue is the negative reflection indicator).
Conclusion
In this paper, the effect of the wellbore parameters on the wellhead water hammer were studied for the first
time based on the wellbore transient flow model establishment. In addition, water hammer signals from
field cases are also studied, and the waveform characteristics related with wellbore parameters influence
was analyzed, providing some useful guidelines for the water hammer diagnostics. First, due to the line
pack effect of the wellbore, a slow change trend of the water hammer waveform is showed rather than
a horizontal one between the time of pump shut-in and the downhole boundary reflection. The wellbore
cementing accelerates the change of the pressure trend, and the moment it occurs in the waveform depends
on the length of the wellbore cementing. The wellbore diameter reduction will appear as a pressure spike
on the water hammer waveform detail, while the diameter expansion will appear as a pressure sinking. The
pressure amplitude of the diameter change is influenced by the diameter variation degree and the length of
the wellbore diameter change. Second, the water hammer waveform shows that the reflection of the fracture
occurs earlier due to the existence of the cemented wellbore section in numerical study. The water hammer
celerity in cemented section is about 14 % larger in uncemented section in field case investigation. Third,
the water hammer reflection time is negatively correlated with the fracturing treatment stages. However, bad
quality of the partial wellbore cementing will alter the water hammer reflection time tendency, which may
lead to misidentification of the downhole fluid acceptance location. The information about the length of the
wellbore cementing and the diameter variation can be the indicators that help calibrate the water hammer
celerity, which is variable during the fracturing stages and the key part in the water hammer diagnostics.
Acknowledgments
The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from National Natural Science Foundation
of China (No. 52004300).
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPEIHFT/​proceedings-pdf/​23IHFT/​23IHFT/​3250845/​spe-215709-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026

===== PAGE 15 =====
SPE-215709-MS 15
References
Bhatnagar A.  Overcoming Challenges in Fracture Stimulation through Advanced Fracture Diagnostics[C]//SPE Asia
Pacific Hydraulic Fracturing Conference. Beijing, China, 2016.
Carey, M. Mondal, S. , Sharma, M.  Analysis of Water Hammer Signatures for Fracture Diagnostics[C]//SPE  Annual
Technical Conference and Exhibition, 2015, Houston, Texas, United States.
Dung N, David C, Tom D, et al Practical applications of water hammer analysis from hydraulic fracturing treatments[C].
SPE Hydraulic Fracturing Technology Conference and Exhibition, Virtual, 2021.
Dunham E M, Zhang J, Moos D, et al Constraints on Pipe Friction and Perforation Cluster Efficiency from Water Hammer
Analysis[C]//SPE Hydraulic Fracturing Technology Conference and Exhibition, The Woodlands, Texas, USA, 2023.
Haustveit K, Dahlgren K, Greenwood H, et al New Age Fracture Mapping Diagnostic Tools-A STACK Case Study[C]//
SPE Hydraulic Fracturing Technology Conference and Exhibition, The Woodlands, Texas, USA, 2017.
Hu X, Luo Y, Zhou F, et al Evaluation of multi-fractures geometry based on water hammer signals: A new comprehensive
model and field application, Journal of Hydrology, 2022, 612: 128240.
Iriarte J , Merritt J , Kreyche B. Using Water Hammer Characteristics as a Fracture Treatment Diagnostic[C]//SPE
Oklahoma City Oil and Gas Symposium, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, USA, 2017.
Jamaloei B Y, Burstall R, Nakhwa A. A Play-Wide Performance Review of Plug and Perf, Ball and Seat, and Pinpoint
Fracturing Methods in the Montney Tight Siltstone Reservoir[C]// SPE International Hydraulic Fracturing Technology
Conference & Exhibition, Muscat, Oman, January 2022.
Kabannik A, Parkhonyuk S, Korkin R, et al Can We Trust the Diversion Pressure as a Decision-Making Tool: Novel
Technique Reveals the Truth. This paper was prepared for presentation at the Abu Dhabi International Petroleum
Exhibition & Conference held in Abu Dhabi, UAE, 12-15 November 2018.
Leggett S, Sakaida S, Zhu D, et al Interpretation of Fracture Initiation Points by in-Well LF-DAS in Horizontal Wells[C]//
SPE Hydraulic Fracturing Technology Conference and Exhibition, The Woodlands, Texas, USA, 2023.
Liang, C. , Ossian, O., Eric, M. , et al , Hydraulic fracture diagnostics from Krauklis wave resonance and tube wave
reflections[J], 2017, Geophysics 82 (3), D171–D186.
Ma X, Zhou F, Ortega A, et al Evaluation of Water Hammer Analysis as Diagnostic Tool for Hydraulic Fracturing[C]//
Unconventional Resources Technology Conference, Denver, Colorado, United States, 2019.
Ma, X. H., Xie, J., Yong, R, et al Geological characteristics and high production control factors of shale gas reservoirs
in Silurian Longmaxi Formation, southern Sichuan Basin, SW China[J]. Petroleum Exploration and Development,
2020, 47( 5):901–915.
Olson K, Merritt J, Barraez R, et al Sealed Wellbore Pressure Monitoring (SWPM) and Calibrated Fracture Modeling :
The Next Step in Unconventional Completions Optimization[C]//SPE Hydraulic Fracturing Technology Conference
and Exhibition, The Woodlands, Texas, USA, 
2023.
Panjaitan, M. , Moriyama, A. , Mcmillan, D., et al Qualifying Diversion in Multi Clusters Horizontal Well Hydraulic
Fracturing in Haynesville Shale Using Water Hammer Analysis, Step-Down Test and Microseismic Data[C] . SPE
Hydraulic Fracturing Technology Conference & Exhibition, The Woodlands, Texas, United States, 2018.
Parkhonyuk S , Fedorov A , Kabannik A, et al  Measurements While Fracturing: Nonintrusive Method of Hydraulic
Fracturing Monitoring[C]//SPE Hydraulic Fracturing Technology Conference and Exhibition. Society of Petroleum
Engineers, 2018b.
Parkhonyuk S , Korkin R, Kabannik A, et al  Novel Monitoring Technology Helps to Make Informed Decisions and
Maximize the Efficiency of Completion Strategy[C]//Unconventional Resources Technology Conference. Society of
Petroleum Engineers, 2018a.
Roman Korkin, Sergey Parkhonyuk, Andrey Fedorov,2020, High Frequency Pressure Monitoring and Data Analytics for
Stimulation Efficiency Determination: New Perspectives or Potential Limits This paper was prepared for presentation
at the SPE Hydraulic Fracturing Technology Conference and Exhibition held in The Woodlands, Texas, USA, 4-6
February 2020.
Rutzinger G
, Wages D, Shrider J , et al Sequenced Fracturing Technique with High-Frequency Pressure Monitoring
Improves Horizontal Injection Well Performance on the North Slope of Alaska[C]//SPE Western Regional Meeting,
Bakersfield, California, 
2017.
Shokanov T, Oliver J, Pena D, et al Integration of Fracturing Pressure Diagnostics with Multi-Well Smart Tracer Program
for Hydraulic Fracturing Stimulation and Diversion Efficiency Assessment[C]//SPE Hydraulic Fracturing Technology
Conference and Exhibition, The Woodlands, Texas, USA, 2023.
Walters T W , Leishear RA.  When the Joukowsky Equation Does Not Predict Maximum Water Hammer
Pressures[J].Journal of Pressure Vessel Technology, 2019, 141(6).
Watson M, Schinnour M, Cramer D D, et al. Driving Completion Execution Improvements Through Detailed Analysis of
Acoustic Imaging and Stimulation Data[C]//SPE Hydraulic Fracturing Technology Conference and Exhibition, The
Woodlands, Texas, USA, 
2023.
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPEIHFT/​proceedings-pdf/​23IHFT/​23IHFT/​3250845/​spe-215709-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026

===== PAGE 16 =====
16 SPE-215709-MS
Weddle P, Griffin L, Mark P. Mining the Bakken II – Pushing the Envelope with Extreme Limited Entry Perforating[C]//
SPE Hydraulic Fracturing Technology Conference and Exhibition, The Woodlands,Texas, USA, 2018.
Yong R, Zhou F, Li M, et al Effects of Fracturing Parameters on Fracture Unevenness During Large-Stage Multi-Cluster
Fracturing in Horizontal Wells[J]. Frontiers in Energy Research, 2021, 9.
Zhang C, Zhang J J , Ma C B , et al. Algorithm for Detecting Multiple Partial Blockages in Liquid Pipelines by Using
Inverse Transient Analysis[J]. SPE Journal, 2021:1–29.
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPEIHFT/​proceedings-pdf/​23IHFT/​23IHFT/​3250845/​spe-215709-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026