SOURCE: 15-2025-Next-Gen Fracture Diagnostics AI-Decoded Water Hammer Physics for Adaptive Design and Field-Wide Optimization.pdf
PAGES: 7
FULL extract 7 pages



===== PAGE 1 =====
SPE-230381-MS
Next-Gen Fracture Diagnostics: AI-Decoded Water Hammer Physics for
Adaptive Design and Field-Wide Optimization
R. M. Iuzofatov, SPE; I. A. Seleznev, A. A. Borisenko, and A. V. Fedorov, STISS LLC, Russia
Copyright 2025, Society of Petroleum Engineers DOI 10.2118/230381-MS
This paper was prepared for presentation at the SPE Caspian Technical Conference and Exhibition scheduled to be held in Baku, Azerbaijan, 25 – 27 November 2025.
This paper was selected for presentation by an SPE program committee following review of information contained in an abstract submitted by the author(s). Contents
of the paper have not been reviewed by the Society of Petroleum Engineers and are subject to correction by the author(s). The material does not necessarily reflect
any position of the Society of Petroleum Engineers, its officers, or members. Electronic reproduction, distribution, or storage of any part of this paper without the written
consent of the Society of Petroleum Engineers is prohibited. Permission to reproduce in print is restricted to an abstract of not more than 300 words; illustrations may
not be copied. The abstract must contain conspicuous acknowledgment of SPE copyright.
Abstract
Hydraulic fracturing is performed to intensify hydrocarbon production by applying high pressure to the
productive formation in order to initiate the creation of a fracture and its further development in the
formation with subsequent placement of a propping agent (proppant) to ensure inflow to the production well.
The job is performed as per preliminary design according to the model, which is necessary for achieving
the optimal parameters of the fracture. At the modeling stage, the expected parameters of the hydraulic
fracture and production rate assessment is made on the basis of information on the physical properties of the
formation according to core studies and well logging data, data from previously performed fracturing jobs
on adjacent wells, a job plan, information on the types and properties of fracturing fluids and proppants.
After conducting hydraulic fracturing and calibrating the fracture model based on the obtained data, it
becomes possible to form a more accurate representation of the actual fracture parameters for productivity
evaluation. However, this representation comes with a significant degree of uncertainty regarding the
actual fracture geometry and fracture planes propagation direction, the uniformity of change in the fracture
half-length within the reservoir in both directions from the wellbore (symmetry), and the distribution of
proppant volume between the fracture planes. Under these circumstances, making decisions regarding the
optimization of the hydraulic fracturing program for a field remains a highly challenging task.
For the studied waterhammer signals, it is difficult to obtain the true values of the fracture parameters;
the available data is a result of related inverse problems` solving.
Recording the pressure signal with a high sampling rate (in practice, up to 200 Hz) makes possible a
detailed analysis of the oscillations observed after pumps shutdown (Ma et al., 2019; Qiu et al., 2023). One
of the problems that can be solved by analyzing the high-frequency pressure signal is the localization of the
hydraulic fracturing zone (Oparin et al., 2024). Knowing the fracturing zone and assuming the influence of
the fracture geometry on the shape of the recorded signal, the task of estimating the fracture parameters is set.
The waterhammer signal recorded at the wellhead can have a complex shape due to the well design, fluid
properties, fracture geometry, and reservoir properties. The variable velocity of acoustic wave propagation
along the wellbore further complicates the solution of the inverse problem.
Currently, there is an increasing number of signal analysis techniques based on the utilization of various
novel neural network algorithms. The development and implementation of these solutions in production
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPECTCE/​proceedings-pdf/​25CTC/​25CTC/​D021S007R002/​5300922/​spe-230381-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026

===== PAGE 2 =====
2 SPE-230381-MS
processes allows to explore new approaches to data management and significantly reduce production costs.
On the other hand, it is of the highest priority for the oil industry to ensure the reliable operation and safety of
any forecasts, and therefore, it is necessary to monitor the physical plausibility of neural network algorithms
or apply it in combination with robust mathematical modeling.
This paper proposes a method for estimating fracture parameters based on the analysis of waterhammer
signals. For this purpose, the use of the latent space parameters of a variational autoencoder trained on a
set of simulated waterhammer data is proposed. Based on the field data analysis results, the possibility of
additional estimation of fracture parameters is demonstrated.
Methodology
The described method consists of two main parts: direct modeling of waterhammer signals using the
Hydraulic Impedance Testing (HIT) method (Paige et al., 1995), and the use of a neural network based on
a variational autoencoder (VAE) scheme (Doersch, 2016) which is trained on simulated data, to estimate
changes in the model parameters of the signal.
HIT method
For modeling the training dataset of waterhammers, a model using the acoustic approximation is applied.
The solution is performed in the frequency domain, transition to which is carried out using the Laplace
transform. The solution is represented as:
where s = σ + i ω –is the Laplace transform variable. The following also holds true:
where  – is the characteristic impedance of the segment. For a segment with a known characteristic
impedance, a system of equations for transferring the hydraulic impedance Z(x, s) from one end of the
segment to the opposite end is formulated:
Thus, the sequence of characteristic impedances of the segments defines the physical configuration of
the system. To account for the influence of the fracture, the formula for the parallel connection of segments
is used at the point where the fracture adjoins the wellbore:
Where  – is the lumped impedance, which depends on the fracture parameters and
affects the signal propagation along the wellbore. After setting the no-flow boundary condition at the bottom
of the well, the impedance transfer equation is used for each allocated segment until the wellhead is reached.
A second boundary condition is set at the wellhead in the form of a given flow rate function `Q`, which
satisfies the requirements for performing the inverse Laplace transform and describes the fluid injection
process during hydraulic fracturing. The final solution in the time domain is obtained after calculating the
inverse Laplace transform at the wellhead.
Procedural modeling was used to create the training dataset of waterhammers, varying several system
parameters: geometric parameters of the fracture model, fracture depth, fracture fluid parameters, wellbore
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPECTCE/​proceedings-pdf/​25CTC/​25CTC/​D021S007R002/​5300922/​spe-230381-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026

===== PAGE 3 =====
SPE-230381-MS 3
fluid parameters, and source function parameters. Furthermore, several wellbore configurations were used
in the modeling to reflect the influence of various pipe joints on the resulting signal. Fig.1 shows examples
of simulated waterhammers used for training.
Figure 1—Examples of training dataset signals.
VAE scheme
A neural network based on a variational autoencoder scheme is used for training on model signals. It is
crucial to mention that learning is unsupervised. In other words, during training this neural network does
not use the model parameters of the signal as prediction targets but learns to reconstruct the signal based
on a chosen metric. By learning to extract core features from the input signal and decoding it to latent
representation, the neural network forms latent space distributions. This allows the use of the latent space
for working with signal parameters.
Using the encoder, each real signal is uniquely mapped to a point in the latent space. Since the latent space
vector is the carrier of all available information for further decoding, vectors of similar signals will be close.
Analyzing the parameters of the nearest neighbors allows obtaining the parameters of the model signals
that are most similar to the input unknown signal from the perspective of the chosen metric. The averaged
parameter values of the neighbors, or the selection of parameters using any clustering method, can be used
as an initial approximation for an accurate initial approximation of the inverse problem (Petrov et al., 2023)
or for estimating the model parameters of the fracture. However, for such an analysis of a single signal, a
preliminary analysis of the inverse problem is necessary. For example, if there are dependent parameters in
the problem, and their mutual change can be compensated, then a clear distribution in the latent space cannot
be achieved, since in this case, changes in the parameters of the initial model do not affect the final signal.
Since this model does not account for the spatial characteristics of the fracture but represents it as a
parallel segment of the well, the solution of the inverse problem based on a single signal contains significant
assumptions. In order to benefit from the resulting distributions in the latent space, instead of analyzing
single signal we propose finding the difference between successive responses to estimate the evolution over
time during the work process. In this case, all system parameters for both signals remain unchanged and any
differences between them are attributed solely to variations in the model's fracture parameters. To assess
the quality of the performed hydraulic fracture, one can study the dynamics of the change in the fracture
response signal, for example, by comparing datafrac (or mini frac) waterhammers with main fracturing job
waterhammers within the same stage.
Despite the inaccurate coincidence of the reconstructed signal with the original field signal, the signal
sequence retains its key differences. The changes in the latent space are of particular importance, and the
analysis of these shifts is of primary interest.
In the context of using the autoencoder, each signal has a uniquely corresponding point in the encoded
latent space, which can be used to investigate the relative characteristics of two signals: to extract the vector
responsible for increasing one of the system parameters. Using model data, we subtract the averaged latent
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPECTCE/​proceedings-pdf/​25CTC/​25CTC/​D021S007R002/​5300922/​spe-230381-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026

===== PAGE 4 =====
4 SPE-230381-MS
representation of signals with a small parameter value from the averaged latent representation of signals
with a large parameter. Thus, we obtain an abstract vector in the latent space, which corresponds to the
averaged direction of increase of the selected parameter. An abstract increase vector is unique for each
single parameter in mathematical modeling. We analyze only those parameters where the projection of the
latent representation increases monotonically with an increase in the model parameter. In this case, the
parameters are the components of fracture impedance. If the monotony is violated, it indicates uncertainty
in the distribution in latent space and makes it unreasonable to base further analysis on the average
representation. An example of such a parameter would be the water hammer celerity. Fig. 2 shows a graph of
the monotonicity of parameters in the latent space. To construct it, an increase vector is allocated, on which
the difference between the successively increasing parameters is sequentially projected. As can be seen on
the left plot of Fig. 2, the latent representations of fracture's half-length are distributed monotonically, thus
they could be analyzed by the proposed method. On the other hand, right plot of Fig. 2 shows distribution of
water hammer celerity and demonstrates the uncertainty in determining the change using a scalar product.
Figure 2—Example of projections of the distribution of an increasing model
parameter onto the corresponding increase vector in the latent space.
On the contrary, we may observe the inherent physicality of the obtained result of non-monotonous
distribution of certain parameters. For instance, if the water hammer celerity was unambiguously determined
by a solitary signal, it would suggest an artefact in the modelling process, allowing for non-physical
inferences.
Then, for two field signals, we obtain the vector difference of their latent representations, project it onto
the pre-calculated parameter increase vector, and based on the projection value, we estimate the change in
the model parameters of the system. For example, if the vector difference of two signals from the same
stage, calculated in this way, is co-directed with the abstract vector of fracture width increase, it is concluded
that one of the results of the operations performed was an increase in the model parameter of fracture width.
Case History
Example 1
The described methodology applied to the field data is presented in Fig. 3. The dataset under analysis
comprises a number of water hammer events – an injection test, a mini-frac, and a main frac for one stage.
In this case, all other variables in the system are held constant, including the well configuration, reflection
from joints, and water hammer celerity for these events.
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPECTCE/​proceedings-pdf/​25CTC/​25CTC/​D021S007R002/​5300922/​spe-230381-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026

===== PAGE 5 =====
SPE-230381-MS 5
Figure 3—Example of 3 signals from one stage. The corresponding decoded waterhammers are shown on the lower graph.
During processing, we obtain 2 vectors of parameter changes in the latent space, as described above. To
illustrate the relative change, we take the initial parameter values of the first signal as 1, then subsequent
parameter changes are calculated relative to the first one using the formula:
where  – is the pre-calculated parameter change vector, and f1, f2 – are the latent representations of the
corresponding field signals.
Fig. 4 shows the result of the signal analysis The water hammer signals in Fig. 4 are normalized to the
maximum values for clarity of presentaion. In this case, one can see a consistent increase in the amplitude of
the signal reflection, which indicates an increase in the fracture parameters as a result of hydraulic fracturing
operations. Through an assessment using the latent space, it is possible to determine the impact of the work
performed immediately after pressure release in the well. The graph on the right picture of Fig. 4 shows a
sequential increase in the model fracture parameter as a result of the hydraulic fracturing operation.
Figure 4—Example of the algorithm's operation on field data from one stage.
Example 2
To demonstrate the operation of the method, we will compare estimates from the proposed method with
reported calculated metrics for increasing fracture opening width. At each stage of this dataset, there are
mini-frac and main-frac jobs an analysis of the difference between which is shown in the Fig. 5.
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPECTCE/​proceedings-pdf/​25CTC/​25CTC/​D021S007R002/​5300922/​spe-230381-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026

===== PAGE 6 =====
6 SPE-230381-MS
Figure 5—Example of the algorithm's operation on field data from several stages.
The blue line of the graph shows the reported difference in fracture width before and after hydraulic
fracturing operations while the dotted lines show estimates of the change in width and half-length using
the proposed algorithm at each stage. It is important to mention a consistent polarity of changes in the
reported parameters and the estimated values provided by the method. Since the fracture impedance of the
model depends on a combination of width and half-length parameters, the detailed numerical representation
depends on the joint calculation of changes in the estimation parameters.
An important result is the speed of obtaining estimates of the effectiveness of the use of intensification
methods. While detailed estimates based on adjusting well parameters through software modeling require
time for data collection and the work of a model expert, estimates using the proposed method involve
analyzing effectiveness immediately after completion in the automatic background mode. Proposed
approach allows for the early detection of potential faults related to hydraulic fracturing operations, and
enables the adjustment of the work plan on-site.
Conclusions
Neural networks are increasingly playing a significant role in digital data processing algorithms. By
leveraging existing architectures and customizing them to meet specific needs, experts in the field can
greatly enhance their day-to-day operations. At the same time, it is crucial in the oil industry to minimize
errors associated with the statistical nature of neural networks in order to prevent inaccurate forecasts. To
achieve this, it may be possible to utilize physically informed neural networks or develop one's own robust
algorithms designed to clarify the solution to inverse problems or accelerate optimization techniques.
This paper presents a novel approach to using the latent space of a generative neural network trained
on the generated dataset of water hammer events to assess changes in fracture parameters during hydraulic
fracturing operations. In combination with the monotonicity of the projection of model parameter changes
in the latent space, as illustrated in Fig. 3 , this approach may be considered physically plausible. The
automation of routine tasks through the implementation of advanced algorithms can significantly reduce
costs and allow for the use of innovative tools for quality assurance and prevention of work-related errors.
Based on the results of this work, an approach to solving the problem of additional fracture parameter
estimation during hydraulic fracturing by analyzing the waterhammer event is described:
1. A novel methodology that combines physics-based modeling (HIT) with machine learning
(variational autoencoder) to interpret complex waterhammer signals for hydraulic fracture
characterization, moving beyond traditional inverse problem techniques is proposed.
2. The research validates that the latent space of a VAE, trained solely on signal reconstruction,
effectively encodes meaningful information about the physical parameters of the fracture system. This
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPECTCE/​proceedings-pdf/​25CTC/​25CTC/​D021S007R002/​5300922/​spe-230381-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026

===== PAGE 7 =====
SPE-230381-MS 7
allows for the estimation of fracture properties by analyzing the proximity and vector relationships
between data points in this compressed representation.
3. The method is particularly powerful for conducting comparative analysis. It can reliably track relative
changes in fracture parameters (e.g., an increase in width or length) between different stages (e.g.,
mini frac vs. main frac) on the same well, providing valuable insights into the fracture's evolution.
4. The technique offers a significant practical advantage by generating a well-informed initial
approximation of fracture parameters. This can drastically improve the convergence speed and
accuracy of subsequent, more precise, inverse problem-solving methods.
5. The conclusion rightly acknowledges the model's simplifications (e.g., representing the fracture as
a lumped impedance) and the significant uncertainties inherent in fracture diagnostics. The method
is positioned as a supplementary tool for evaluation rather than a definitive standalone solution,
highlighting a scientifically honest approach.
Further development of the methodology for improving the forecast may involve both a more in-depth
analysis of the physics of the phenomenon under study and the addition of various signals of different nature
to the shared latent space. In the latter case, the existence of a shared latent space would allow the integration
of solutions from various mathematical models into a unified view of the developing production facility,
which would lead to a more in-depth analysis of events and improvement of existing forecasts.
References
Doersch, C., 2016, Tutorial on variational autoencoders: arXiv preprint, arXiv:1606.05908.
Ma, X. , Zhou, F., Ortega Andrade, J. A. , Gosavi, S. , and Burch, D.  2019. Evaluation of Water Hammer Analysis
as a Diagnostic Tool for Hydraulic Fracturing. Presented at the SPE/AAPG/SEG Unconventional Resources
Technology Conference, Denver, Colorado, USA, 22-24 July. URTEC-2019-935-MS. doi: https://doi.org/10.15530/
urtec-2019-935.
Oparin, M. , Crawford, E. , Alzahrani, B. , Tineo, R., Najmi, A. , Enkababian, P., Borisenko, A. , and Fedorov, A.
2024. Nonintrusive Rapid Evaluation of Fracture Isolation in Plug-And-Perf Completions Based on Data Science
Methodology. Presented at the International Petroleum Technology Conference, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, 12-14
February. IPTC-24435-EA. doi: https://doi.org/10.2523/IPTC-24435-EA.
Paige, R. W., Murray, L. R., and Roberts, J. D. M. 1995. Field Application of Hydraulic Impedance Testing for Fracture
Measurement. SPE Prod & Fac 10 (1): 7–12. SPE-26525-PA. https://doi.org/10.2118/26525-PA.
Petrov, I.B., Stankevich, A.S., Vasyukov, A.V. 2023. On Obtaining Initial Approximation For Full Wave Inversion Problem
Using Convolutional Neural Network (in Russian). Ross. Akademija Nauk Mat. Inform. Processy Upr. 512 (1): 58–64.
Qiu, Y., Hu, X. , Zhou, F., Yi, P., Wang, Y., and Jiang, Z.  2023. A New Investigation of Wellbore Parameters
Influence on Shut-In Pressure Transient Signatures from Water Hammer Fracture Diagnostics. Presented at the
SPE International Hydraulic Fracturing Technology Conference and Exhibition, Muscat, Sultanate of Oman, 12-14
September. SPE-215709-MS. doi: https://doi.org/10.2118/215709-MS.
Downloaded from onepetro.​org/​SPECTCE/​proceedings-pdf/​25CTC/​25CTC/​D021S007R002/​5300922/​spe-230381-ms.​pdf by China University of Petroleum Beijing user on 13 August 2026