\n===== PAGE 1 =====\nMechanical Systems and Signal Processing 228 (2025) 112455
Available online 19 February 2025
0888-3270/© 2025 Published by Elsevier Ltd.
Full Length Article
High resolution imaging of pressurised water supply lines
Saber Nasraoui
a , b , *
, Moez Louati
c
, Mohamed Salah Ghidaoui
c
a
Department of Physics, Faculty of Sciences of Tunis, University Tunis El Manar 1060 Tunis, Tunisia, Laboratory of Mathematical Modeling and 
Multi-scale Simulation for Physics and Engineering, Tunisia
b
Department of Water Supply, Sanitation and Environmental Engineering, IHE Delft, Netherlands
c
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay Campus, Hong Kong, China
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Acoustic imaging
Time reversal
High-frequency acoustic waves
Pipeline
Water supply
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes a computationally efficient, nondestructive, and medium range guided wave 
imaging of pressurized water supply lines based on the time reversal (TR) technique. A send- 
receive transducer is inserted in the water column from a single access point and used to mea -
sure multi – input – multi – output (MIMO) pressure wave signals that propagate along the wave -
guide. The resulting high frequency (10 kHz-100 kHz) signals are processed by the TR-MUltiple 
SIgnal Classification (TR-MUSIC) algorithm to provide high-resolution images the water pipe 
system. The resulting images reveal the pipe wall inner and outer condition with millimeter 
resolution. The proposed technique is tested and validated in lab as well as in field scale facilities 
on pressurized water-filled viscoelastic high-density polyethylene (HDPE) pipes. In particular, we 
successfully imaged (i) a straight 6.5 m long, water-filled 90 mm HDPE lab pipe containing a 
small blockage with thickness 7.65 mm and a length 97 mm and (ii) a 36.5 m long section water- 
filled 160 mm HDPE pipe containing three T-connections and a small blockage with thickness 16 
mm and length 95 mm.
1. Introduction
Urban Urban Water Supplies Systems (UWSS) — a complex network of pipes that lie beneath our streets — are vital for life and 
economic productivity. Such systems often experience the formation of defects during their lifetime due to physical and/or chemical 
processes, including corrosion, failure of pipe lining, and deposition of suspended fine particles. Such defects often begin as a cluster of 
small defects on the inside of a pipe wall which we refer to hereafter as incipient defects. The growth of such incipient defects with time 
can eventually lead to bursts, leaks, and sizeable blockages, resulting in unacceptably large system water losses and excessive energy 
use. Recent studies estimate that 126 billion cubic meters are unaccounted for annually by water utilities around the world, for an 
equivalent monetary loss of USD 39 billion [1] . Until now, efforts to curb these massive water losses and energy wastage in existing 
UWSS has focused on non-intrusive and non-destructive technology development for detecting existing, fully-fledged, physical defects 
and operational inefficiencies. However, pinpointing incipient defects at an early stage for remediation prevents their progression into 
significant failures, offering a proactive approach to UWSS management.
Traditional internal sensor-based imaging systems are used to monitor and report the condition of a pipeline ’ s internal surface and 
pipe wall and enable detection of corrosion sites, cracks, wall thickness, and weld condition, as well as existing leaks. Smart Pipeline 
inspection gauges (Smart PIGs) were originally developed by the energy pipeline industry and have only recently been emulated by 
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: nasraoui1110@gmail.com (S. Nasraoui). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing
journal homepag e: www.else vier.com/loc ate/ymss p
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ymssp.2025.112455
Received 24 March 2024\n===== PAGE 2 =====\nMechanical Systems and Signal Processing 228 (2025) 112455
2
water pipe tools like Smart Ball, Sahara, CCTV, and acoustic sonar [2 – 4] . These tools may also have on-board optical, magnetic, or 
acoustic sensors which, like Smart PIGs, must be launched into a water pipe and be retrieved through a suitably sized port, sometimes 
using a tether cable. PIG-based sensors are not autonomous or semi-autonomous (even in the energy pipeline sector); rather, they are 
propelled by the pipe flow or tethered. This technology is suitable for use in conduits that present no obstructions to free passage of in- 
line sensing tools (eg., oil & gas pipelines). On the other hand, UWSS are often intricate networks of pipes with numerous pipe- 
diameter changes, partial-bore inline valves and abrupt changes in direction that do not permit the use of inline Smart PIGs. Addi -
tionally, inline Smart PIGs currently function as a slow, in-pipe survey tool, typically moving at a speed of approximately 0.3 m/s. 
Moreover, inline Smart PIGs involve significant costs and labor, require traffic diversion [2] .
Less costly, non-disruptive, and more efficient techniques such as transient (acoustic)-based defect detection methods (TBBDM) 
have been intensively studied and developed [5 – 13] . Among these methods, the low frequency ( < 100 Hz) wave-based methods are 
unique for their fast speed (~1000 times faster than roving sensors) and broad coverage (~kilometres), are both economical and 
applicable to all fully-developed faults. However, low frequency (LF) wave-based methods have poor location resolution (several 
meters) [6] and are limited to defects which are large enough to produce visible reflections since noise is strong at the LF band. Since 
the achievable resolution is directly proportional to the probing wavelength, high frequency (HF) wave-based methods have been 
developed to achieve a resolution in the order of centimeters [14,15] . Yet, these HF wave-based methods remain applicable only for 
fully fledged defects (i.e., through-wall defects such as leaks and also defects with a radial length scale of the order of 15 % of the pipe 
diameter or larger). These limitations underscore a significant gap: existing methods cannot reliably detect and image incipient defects 
or small structural anomalies at the millimeter scale. To address this gap, we propose a novel pipeline imaging technique based on the 
time reversal (TR) property of high-frequency acoustic waves (10 – 100 kHz) enabling subwavelength resolution.
This method would permit UWSS management to move from reactive to proactive mode, where anomalies with length scales of the 
order of millimetre are detected and imaged (not just localized). The proposed imaging technique serves as a decision support tool for 
timely maintenance and mitigation measures. The produced image can reveal the pipe wall inner and outer condition, incipient as well 
as existing defects at a scale up to millimeters and small (5 to 10 %) change in wall stiffness or mass. The proposed pipeline imaging 
technique is based on the wave time reversal property that has been experimentally proven in UWSS [16] . This technique specifically 
advances the transient-time-reversal by demonstrating its capability to image small-scale defects in pressurized, viscoelastic, water- 
filled HDPE pipes — an application not previously achieved. The technique operates through a forward step that actively generates 
HF waves, which are sensed, followed by a Time Reversal step where subspace noise is reversed and re-emitted into a UWSS model. 
This approach allows for detailed imaging of the pipe wall ’ s inner and outer conditions, enabling proactive UWSS maintenance. The 
technique operates through a forward step where actively-generated high frequency waves in UWSS are sensed, followed by a Time 
Reversal step where the chronological order of the subspace noise is reversed and re-emitted into a model of the UWSS. The proposed 
tech\n===== PAGE 3 =====\nMechanical Systems and Signal Processing 228 (2025) 112455
3
denoted as x
£ 
= ( x
£
, r
£
) where x
£ 
and r
£ 
represent respectively the axial and the radial coordinates of the £
th 
location, and £ = 1, 2, … , M . 
The data is collected as follows: at each of the £
th 
transducer location, an acoustic source signal S ( t ) is projected, and the system 
response is measured at all locations within the array at a sampling rate F
s 
(as the rule of thumb, the F
s 
is ten times the maximum 
injected frequency). The digitized time-domain signals P ( n/F
s
, x
i 
| x
j
) from each transmitter – receiver combination are grouped into a ( 
M × M × N ) 3D matrix K
3 D 
( Fig. 2 ) where i = 1, 2, … , M , j = 1, 2, … , M , n = 1, 2, … , N , and N is the signal length in time, x
j 
is the source 
location and x
i 
is the receiver location.
This paper focuses on imaging with high frequency (10kH-100 kHz). The low level of noise in this frequency range [17] allows the 
use of the single-frequency versions of the TR-MUSIC algorithms and develop real time pipe imaging technique. In this approach, we 
perform the fast Fourier transforms (FFTs) on the entries in the 3D matrix K
3 D
, which contains the time-domain signals collected by the 
hydrophone array along the pipe. This transformation converts the time-domain signals into the frequency domain, resulting in the 
frequency-domain 3D matrix 
̂
K
3 D
.From 
̂
K
3 D
, we then extract the 2D multistatic response matrix K ( ω ), which represents the pipe 
system ’ s response at each specific frequency ω . This frequency-domain matrix K( ω ) is subsequently used in the TR-MUSIC algorithm to 
generate a detailed, real-time image of the pipe system. For example, when using an acoustic source with a Gaussian-modulated sine 
pulse, the imaging technique is applied to K ( ω
0
), which is the 2D multistatic response matrix of the pipe system at the central frequency 
ω
0
. Here, ω
0 
represents the central frequency of the injected source, which corresponds to the peak of the frequency response signal.
2.2. Time-Reversal operation
In this paper the MUSIC approach for time-reversal imaging is considered. This approach was first proposed in [18] and named 
‘time-reversal MUSIC ’ because both time-reversal methods [19] and MUSIC can be explained using the eigenvalues of the time reversal 
operator [20] . The MUSIC algorithm, a high-resolution signal processing technique, works by decomposing the multistatic response 
matrix K ( ω ) (which can be provided experimentally from measurement the data collected on the hydrophone array) into orthogonal 
signal and noise subspaces using singular value decomposition (SVD). This mathematical framework is particularly useful for time- 
reversal imaging as it exploits the inherent properties of the Green ’ s function and the orthogonality of subspaces. The MUSIC algo -
rithm, a high-resolution signal processing technique, works by decomposing the multistatic response matrix (which can be obtained 
experimentally from the data collected by the hydrophone array) into orthogonal signal and noise subspaces using singular value 
decomposition (SVD). This mathematical framework is particularly useful for time-reversal imaging, as it leverages the inherent 
properties of the Green ’ s function and the orthogonality between the signal and noise subspaces. The signal subspace is constructed 
analytically using the Green ’ s function, which models the propagation of waves through the medium. The Green ’ s function formalism 
helps to represent the expected response of the system to signals originating from potential scatterer locations. Once the signal is 
analytically constructed, it is projected onto the noise subspace. Specifically, the imaging function relies on projecting test locations 
onto the noise subspace, which enables a precise identification of the spatial distribution of scatterers.
More details about the imaging algorithm steps are given in the following. 
i