\n===== PAGE 1 =====\nWater Research 221 (2022) 118828
Available online 6 July 2022
0043-1354/© 2022 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Physics-informed neural networks for hydraulic transient analysis in 
pipeline systems 
Jiawei Ye, Nhu Cuong Do, Wei Zeng, Martin Lambert
* 
School of Civil, Environmental and Mining Engineering, University of Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia   
ARTICLE INFO  
Keywords: 
Hydraulic transient 
Physics-informed neural network 
Artificial intelligence 
Pipeline system 
Partial differential equations 
ABSTRACT  
In water pipeline systems, monitoring and predicting hydraulic transient events are important to ensure the 
proper operation of pressure control devices (e.g., pressure reducing valves) and prevent potential damages to 
the network infrastructure. Simulating transient pressures using traditional numerical methods, however, require 
a complete model with known boundary and initial conditions, which is rarely able to obtain in a real system. 
This paper proposes a new physics-based and data-driven method for targeted transient pressure reconstruction 
without the need of having a complete pipe system model. The new method formulates a physics-informed neural 
network (PINN) by incorporating both measured data and physical laws of the transient flow in the training 
process. This enables the PINN to learn and explore hidden information of the hydraulic transient (e.g., boundary 
conditions and wave damping characteristics) that is embedded in the measured data. The trained PINN can then 
be used to predict transient pressures at any location of the pipeline. Results from two numerical and one 
experimental case studies showed a high accuracy of the pressure reconstruction using the proposed approach. In 
addition, a series of sensitivity analyses have been conducted to determine the optimal hyperparameters in the 
PINN and to understand the effects of the sensor configuration on the model performance.   
1. Introduction 
Hydraulic transient phenomena widely exist in pipeline systems, 
from water distribution networks ( Boulos et al., 2005 ) and hydroelectric 
power plants ( Afshar et al., 2010 ) to gas pipelines ( Reddy et al., 2006 ) or 
industrial piping systems. The pressure induced by hydraulic transient 
events (e.g., valve closure) can change rapidly and reach an extremely 
level ( El-Hazek et al., 2020 ). Those extreme pressures have significant 
impacts on the reliability of a pipeline system and may result in device 
failures, pipe bursts ( Misiunas et al., 2006 ), water loss and contaminant 
intrusion ( Ebacher et al., 2012 ). 
The adoption of smart sensor networks, with a number of high- 
frequency loggers deployed across the water pipeline system ( Xing 
and Sela, 2019 ; Wu et al., 2021 ), can be used to capture and monitor the 
transient pressure. Large amounts of collected data enable smart water 
network operation and management ( PUB, 2016 ) to mitigate the nega -
tive impact of transient events. However, high-frequency loggers are 
often sparsely distributed in a water distribution system (WDS), leading 
to limited monitoring of the pressure variations among the entire sys -
tem. Locations without measurement devices may possess a hidden risk 
since abnormal pressures occurring in these regions could not be 
recorded by existing sensors at other locations. Therefore, transient 
analysis for unmonitored locations using pressure measurements at 
sparsely existing loggers is crucial for water utilities to better understand 
the impact of transient events and thus take preventive operational 
actions. 
Over the past several decades, various numerical models have been 
developed to simulate and predict pressure variations of hydraulic 
transient events, including the wave characteristic method ( Wood et al., 
1966 ), method of characteristics (MOC) ( Wylie and Streeter, 1993 ), 
finite-different method (FDM) ( Chaudhry, 2014 ), and finite volume 
method (FVM) ( Hwang and Chung, 2002 ). These physical-based\n===== PAGE 2 =====\nWater Research 221 (2022) 118828
2
various uncertain factors that are normally difficult to calibrate in the 
field. These include but are not limited to pipe network parameters (e.g., 
pipe diameters, wave speeds), the dynamic effect of unsteady friction 
( Brunone et al., 2000 ; Vardy and Brown, 1995 ; Vítkovský et al., 2000 ) 
and pipe-wall viscoelasticity ( Covas et al., 2005 ). 
With the increasing availability of wireless sensors in recent years, 
data-driven solvers become popular in WDS modeling and analysis since 
they can avoid the requirement of a detailed physical model. These 
approaches use measurement data, such as pressures and flowrates, to 
infer the hydraulic states and system parameters. Applications of data- 
driven solvers in pipeline systems can be found in various research 
topics, ranging from pipe condition assessment ( Khan et al., 2006 ; Jafar 
et al., 2010 ) and water quality evaluation (
¨
Omer Faruk, 2010 ; Khatri 
et al., 2019 ) to pipe failure detection ( Wu et al., 2016 ; Zhou et al., 2019 ; 
Bohorquez et al., 2021 ). The data-driven solvers, especially machine 
learning, have also been applied for pressure prediction at steady state 
( Lima et al., 2017 ). For example, Ridolfi et al. (2014) applied the arti -
ficial neural network (ANN) with an entropy-based method to determine 
water pressure at unknown nodes. The small discrepancy between 
simulated and observed water pressure at each node demonstrated the 
capability of this method for pressure prediction. Hajgat ´o et al. (2021) 
used a graph neural network (GNN), a machine learning model that can 
explicitly include the topology information of a pipe network, to 
reconstruct all the nodal pressures based on partially observed nodal 
pressures in three different WDSs. A GNN model was also proposed by 
Xing and Sela (2022) to estimate the flows and heads in WDSs. In this 
study, the physical laws that govern the steady-state hydraulics were 
incorporated into the training process to improve the performance of the 
trained model. 
Although the above examples achieved some success in pressure and 
flowrate prediction in hydraulic steady states, there is a lack of study on 
transient state prediction, specifically for predicting transient pressure 
in pipeline networks. The key obstacles to this problem are, firstly, the 
sparsely measured data due to a limited number of sensors and large 
uncertainties that exist in practice, such as uncertain parameters of 
pipes, dispersion and dissipation of pressure waves (also referred to as 
damping) and background noise of measured data. Secondly, it can be 
seen that the traditional physics-based methods for transient pressure 
prediction are not well fit to use with field measurement data as they 
require complete knowledge of the transient source/excitation to char -
acterize the acceleration/deceleration of transient flows (i.e., solving a 
set of complex PDEs). 
The physics-informed neural network (PINN) proposed by Raissi 
et al. (2019) is a potential effective tool to overcome these obstacles. 
Different to purely data-driven models, the PINN can utilize hidden 
physical information from the observed dataset to support solving 
nonlinear PDEs. Given its high accuracy in predicting complex dynamics 
from incomplete models and sparse data, the PINN has recently been 
applied to various fields, such as computational fluid dynamics (CFD) 
( Buhendwa et al., 2021 ; Mao et al., 2020 ; Rao et al., 2020 ), power 
systems ( Misyris et al., 2020 ), metamaterial design ( Chen et al., 2020 ) 
and transient electrodynamics ( Noakoasteen et al., 2020 ). 
In this paper, a PINN-based transient analysis method has been 
proposed for transient pressure prediction. To the authors ’ knowledge, 
this is the first such attempt to enhance hydraulic transient analysis 
without a complete model by incorporating a PINN into the analysis. 
Compared with the traditional physics-based numerical methods, the 
PINN-based met\n===== PAGE 3 =====\nWater Research 221 (2022) 118828
3
(inputs) when the system parameters λ and observation dataset M
d 
are 
available. Without knowing the initial and boundary conditions, the 
Eqs. (1) and (2) cannot be solved. In other words, the state variables Φ 
cannot be obtained by conventional numerical transient solvers that use 
this set of transient governing equations. In addition, the inevitable 
uncertainties existing in the pipeline system and observation data may 
affect the accuracy of the result from these deterministic methods where 
all the parameters and data require to be known exactly. To solve this 
state estimation problem with various uncertainties, a PINN-based 
transient analysis method is formulated in the next section. 
2.2. Physics-informed neural networks 
To formulate a PINN for transient flow which is governed by the 
aforementioned PDEs (i.e., Eqs. (1) and (2) ), a deep neural network 
(DNN) is first constructed as a surrogate of the PDE solution. Here, the 
feed-forward neural network (FNN) which is relatively simple but suf -
ficient for most PDE problems is employed. The FNN is trained by a two- 
step process: forward propagation and back propagation. In the forward 
propagation, the FNN takes the spatial-temporal variables { x , t } as input 
and the mix-variable solution 
̂
Φ ( x , t ; θ ) = [
̂
h ( x , t ; θ ) , ̂q ( x , t ; θ )] as output. 
The symbol θ is a vector containing all weights and biases in the neural 
network that are adjusted by a gradient descent algorithm in the back 
propagation. The hat above the variables indicates that the variables are 
calculated by the neural network. 
The next key step is to constrain the output 
̂
Φ ( x , t , θ ) to satisfy the 
data observations as well as the physical laws defined by Eqs. (1) and 
(2) . To quantify the compliance of the neural network with the physical 
laws, the residuals are defined as: 
F
1
= A
∂ ̂q
∂ t
+ ̂q
∂ ̂q
∂ x
+ gA
2
∂
̂
h
∂ x
+ f
| ̂q | ̂q
2 D
(5)  
F
2
= A
∂
̂
h
∂ t
+ ̂q
∂
̂
h
∂ x
+
a
2
g
∂ ̂q
∂ x
(6) 
The residual vector F = [ F
1
, F
2
] represents the degree of compliance 
of the PINN with the physical laws, with small residual values indicating 
high compliance. The spatial and time derivatives 
∂
̂
h
∂ x
, 
∂
̂
h
∂ t
,
∂ ̂q
∂ x
and
∂ ̂q
∂ t 
in F
1 
and F
2 
are computed by using the Automatic Differentiation (AD) al -
gorithm ( Baydin et al., 2018 ). Note that the AD can accurately calculate 
the derivative of numeric functions expressed as a graph structure, 
especially for neural networks, since it does not require any approxi -
mation schemes (e.g., the finite difference approximation) and avoids 
the errors such as truncation and round-off errors. Thus, the PINN is a 
mesh-free method without the requirement of a discrete mesh to solve 
the PDEs. 
A set of predefined points (herein, referred to as collocation points) 
at k
f 
different locations C
1
, C
2
, … , … , C
k
f 
(see Fig. 1 ) with N time steps 
for each are selected to evaluate their residuals. The collocation dataset 
can be defined as 
M
f
=
{
x
j
f
, t
j
f
}
N
f
j = 1
(7)  
where the subscript f indicates the collocation points, N
f 
indicates the 
number of the data points at all the collocation points and at all the time 
steps, and N
f
= k
f
× N . Note that the solutions from the PINN at these 
points must comply with the partial differential equations and the 
evaluation of their residuals does not require the true ‘target value ’ of Φ 
(i.e., the observation data). Therefore, these points can be placed at any 
location along the pipelines. Since it is impossible to make collocation 
points cover the whole continuous spatial-temporal domain, a limited 
number of collocation points are selected to account for the global PDEs. 
The number of collocation points can be determined by an Adaptive 
Collocation Method ( van der Meer et al., 2021 ). 
Different from other PINN applications, the PINN for transient flow 
analysis in this paper assumes the boundary and